The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Silver Domino, by Marie Corelli


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Silver Domino
       Or, Side Whispers, Social and Literary


Author: Marie Corelli



Release Date: October 12, 2020  [eBook #63446]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILVER DOMINO***


E-text prepared by Tim Lindell, Martin Pettit, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images digitized by the
Google Books Library Project (http://books.google.com) and generously made
available by HathiTrust Digital Library (https://www.hathitrust.org/)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      HathiTrust Digital Library. See
      https://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015063547536





THE SILVER DOMINO


      *      *      *      *      *      *

_OPINIONS OF THE PRESS._

"The 'Silver Domino' can handle words and phrases in a manner which
either proves an extraordinary original gift or a good deal of
practice.... The parody of Miss Olive Schreiner is one of the best and
severest parodies we have seen for years.... The book is one to read
and laugh over."--_Daily Chronicle, Oct. 14th._

"All unexpectedly one finds one's self in the midst of a most
up-to-date literary satire.... I am bound to say the 'thwackings' [in
the 'Silver Domino'] are entertaining."--_Star, Oct. 10th._

"The unknown author of the 'Silver Domino' has been good enough to send
me his book, which is very bright and amusing and outspoken. He has his
knife into a great many people."--_The World, Oct. 10th._

"An audacious little book called the 'Silver Domino' is causing a great
deal of amusement in literary circles.... There are some delightful
parodies; also a capital literary creed, which takes liberties with the
_Saturday Review_, which, by the way, is again for sale."--_Western
Daily Mercury, Oct. 15th._

"The 'Silver Domino' consists of truculently candid sallies at the
expense of men eminent in politics, literature, and journalism."--_The
Times, Oct. 15th._

"I must confess to have chuckled hugely over some of his [the 'Silver
Domino's'] diatribes."--_News of the World, Oct. 23rd._

"Pungent, mordant satire went out with Grenville Murray, but his mantle
has fallen upon the anonymous author of the 'Silver Domino,' who has
issued some intensely amusing social and literary side-whispers.... All
that he has to tell us is told with wonderful _verve_ and in an easy
flowing style which has a great charm for all who can appreciate such
satire.... I could dwell upon the 'Silver Domino' with great benefit
to my readers and satisfaction to myself, but space forbids; so I
will only say that the book is the most valuable contribution to our
satirical literature that has appeared for many, many years. Our advice
is: 'Get it; read it; and re-read it.'"--_Society, Oct, 19th._

"The 'Silver Domino' is a volume of essays.... There are pungency and
freshness about many of the writer's observations."--_Sunday Sun, Oct.
23rd._

"The 'Silver Domino' is suggestive of the gentle Malayan exercise of
running a-muck or the emancipated young person having a fling to its
own obvious enjoyment."--_Saturday Review, Oct. 29th._

"If it is to Mr. Lang's generosity that we owe the hatching of this
book, that gentleman must assuredly stand aghast."--_Vanity Fair, Oct.
29th._

"The literary puzzle of the hour is--Who wrote the 'Silver Domino'?...
The question of authorship apart, nothing at once so bitter and so
clever has appeared since the days of Lord Byron."--_The Literary
World, Nov. 4th._

"'Who is the author of the "Silver Domino"?' That is the question I am
asked wherever I go. Whoever it is, he is the author of an extremely
clever book.... Were I to make one single quotation from the 'Silver
Domino' you would be angry with me, yet there is not one of you but
will read it speedily."--_The Queen, Oct. 29th._

      *      *      *      *      *      *


THE SILVER DOMINO;

Or

Side Whispers, Social and Literary.

Eighth Edition.

With Author's Note to This Issue.






London:
Lamley and Co., Exhibition Road.
1893.

[All rights reserved.]




To

ANDREW LANG,

WHOSE LITERARY GENEROSITY TOWARDS ME

IS PAST ALL PRAISE,

I,

WITH THE UTMOST RECOGNITION,

DEDICATE THIS BOOK.




AUTHOR'S NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

Since the first edition of this book was published, some three weeks
ago, a grave event has occurred, which may be said to have closed an
epoch in the history of Literature. Tennyson, Poet and Laureate, the
last, perhaps, of the exponents of a pure, refined, and musical school
of English poesy, has left us. I will not say he has "crossed the
bar," because I consider that phrase has been overdone. He has passed
away in the fulness of years and honours, amid the sorrowing regret
of all those thousands to whom his melodious muse was as a part of
home and country. No poet ever lived a more easy and amply rewarded
life,--no poet ever died a more easy and enviable death. And I have
nothing to recant in what I have said of him in my chapter entitled
"Of Certain Great Poets." I am only sorry that he did not live to
read my lines, as I know he would have readily understood the sincere
spirit of admiration for his great qualities that moved me to my candid
speech. My "reviewers" have not elected to quote any word of mine on
the subject of the late Laureate, they generally preferring to save
time and trouble by an all-round but rash declaration that there is no
good said of any one in my book. I therefore challenge my readers to
the perusal of "Certain Great Poets," for I will yield to no one in my
admiration of Tennyson, no, not even to Lewis Morris, who calls him
"Master," whereas I was privileged to call him "Friend." I have praised
his genius with as much fervour and possibly more sincerity than any of
the versifiers who have written rhymes to his memory while squabbling
for his vacant post; and, as regards his Diogenes-like unsociability
and distaste for the "outside vulgar," I have only said what every one
admits to be true. I transcribe here the copy of a letter received from
the great Poet not long before his death:--


     "ALDWORTH, HASLEMERE, SURREY.

     "MY DEAR ----,--I thank you heartily for your kind letter and
     welcome gift. You do well not to care for fame. Modern fame is too
     often a mere crown of thorns, and brings all the vulgarity of the
     world upon you. I sometimes wish I had never written a line.

     "Your friend,
     "TENNYSON."


The "vulgarity of the world" and the "outside vulgar" are phrases
by which the literary folk designate the vast Public, without whose
substantial appreciation, they, the inside elect, would starve. The
"outside vulgar," however, with unerring good taste, have purchased
Tennyson's work for the past fifty years, and in the rich harvest
of thoughts they have thus gathered, they can smile with a tender
indulgence at their Kingly Minstrel's shrinking aversion to the
"crowd" who loved him. He was the greatest poet of the Victorian era;
and, draped in the flag of England, as befits his sturdy and splendid
patriotism, he sleeps the sleep of the just and pure-minded who have
served their Art, as worthy subjects serve their Queen, loyally and
unflinchingly to the end. It was "fitting," I suppose, that he should
be laid to rest in dismal "Poet's Corner"--(beside Browning, too! the
Real singer beside the Sham!)--but many would rather have seen him
placed in a shrine of his own,--a warm grassy grave under the "talking"
English oaks whose forest language he so well translated, than thus
pent up among the crumbling ashes of inferior and almost forgotten men.

Another change has come "o'er the spirit of my dream" since, in the
language of the _Daily Chronicle_, I flung back the curtain and made
my bow to the public "in a breezy, not to say slap-bang, manner." The
_Pall Mall Gazette_ has changed hands and politics. Once, as will
be seen in the ensuing pages, I adored the _Pall Mall Gazette_. Its
fads, its whimsies, its prize "booms," and above all its religious
notions, were my delight. It was, as I said, a "bright particular star"
in the sphere of journalism, but I doubt whether it will continue to
shine on. I much fear that its days of Whimsicality and Boom are over,
though it now has a serious and gentlemanly Scot for an editor, who
does not find his chief amusement in levelling cheap sneers at Crown
and Constitution, and advocating a dangerous and (at heart) unpopular
Democracy. However, we shall see. In the interim, though I may not now
"adore" the _Pall Mall_, I mournfully respect it.

I fancy I have made a slight error in that harmless, but Grundy-scaring
jest of mine entitled "The Journalist's Creed." I have alluded to the
excellent and brilliant Henry Labouchere, as "very Rad of very Rad." It
should have been "very Tory of very Tory." This is absurd? Incongruous?
Impossible? Well! Events will prove whether I am right or wrong. And
I beg to assure all whom it may concern, that I consider there is no
more "irreverence" in the "Journalist's Creed" than is displayed by the
respectable church-goer who murmurs an address or prayer to God in the
hollow of his stove-pipe hat, rather than spoil the set of his trousers
by kneeling down.

I very earnestly desire to thank my critics one and all for the
attention they have bestowed upon me. They have taken me very
seriously; much more seriously than I have taken myself. I am so
little "peculiar," that I confess to have copied the phraseology of
my diatribes on certain poets and novelists from the language of the
"reviews" in divers journals, and I am truly surprised to hear such
phraseology termed "vulgar." When I was a "known" author (I was, once!)
reviewers "reviewed" _me_ with a profuseness of vituperative force that
struck me as singular; but I did not presume to call their well-rounded
terms of abuse "vulgar" or "scurrilous." Now I see I might very well
have done so, as they all agree in a condemnation of their own
literary vernacular. One lives and learns (this is a platitude), and
when an author anonymously "slates" those who anonymously "slate" him,
it is curious and instructive to observe what a different view is taken
of his case! It is a strange world (platitude number two).

In conclusion I would fain express my gratitude for the diverting
entertainment which I have had out of the various "guesses" as to my
identity. They are guesses as wild and strange and erroneous as any
that ever followed the track of a "domino noir" through the mazes of
Carnival. I can, however, only repeat that I am not what I seem, and
that up to the present, so far as my personality has been hinted at, or
even boldly asserted, such supposititious "clues" are all random shots
and fall wide of the mark. With the utmost civility, I beg to inform
you, dear friends and enemies alike, that in this trivial matter of
"guessing," you are all, every one of you,--wrong!

THE SILVER DOMINO.

_Nov. 9th, 1892._




CONTENTS

                                                      PAGE
    I. OPENETH DISCOURSE                                 3

   II. SOLILOQUISETH ON LITTLE MANNERS                  23

  III. PRONOUNCETH ON LESSER MORALS                     43

   IV. OF SAVAGES AND SKELETONS                         59

    V. HOW NAMES ARE SUPERIOR TO PERSONS                79

   VI. CONVERSETH WITH LORD SALISBURY                   91

  VII. CHATTETH WITH THE GRAND OLD MAN                 109

 VIII. OF THE TRUE JOURNALIST AND HIS CREED            127

   IX. OF WRITERS IN GROOVES                           137

    X. OF THE SOCIAL ELEPHANT                          165

   XI. THE STORY OF A SOUTH AFRICAN DREAM              183

  XII. QUESTIONETH CONCERNING THE SLOUGH OF DESPOND    197

 XIII. DESCRIBETH THE PIOUS PUBLISHER                  211

  XIV. OF CERTAIN GREAT POETS                          227

   XV. OF MORE POETS                                   251

  XVI. TO A MIGHTY GENIUS                              267

 XVII. CONCERNING A GREAT FRATERNITY                   293

XVIII. EULOGISETH ANDREW                               311

  XIX. BYRON LOQUITUR                                  327

   XX. MAKETH EXIT                                     359




I.

OPENETH DISCOURSE.


Well, old musty, dusty, time-trodden arena of Literature and Society,
what now? Are your doors wide open, and may a stranger enter? A
perpetual dance is going on, so your outside advertisements proclaim;
and truly a dance is good so long as it is suggestive of wholesome
mirth. But is yours a dance of Death or of Life? A fandango of mockery,
a rigadoon of sham, or a waltzing-game at "beggar my neighbour"?
Moreover, is the fun worth paying for? Let me look in and judge.

Nay, by the gods of Homer, what a dire confusion of sight and sense
and sound is all this "mortal coil" and whirligig of humanity! What
noise and laughter, interspersed with sundry groanings, as of fiends
in Hell! Listening, I catch the echoes of many voices I know; now
and again I have glimpses of faces that in their beauty or ugliness,
their smiling or sneering, are perfectly familiar to me. Friends? No,
not precisely. No man who has lived long enough to be wise in social
wisdom can be certain that he has a friend anywhere; besides, I do not
pretend to have found what Socrates himself could not discover. Enemies
then? Truly that is probable! Enemies are more than luxuries: they are
necessities; one cannot live strongly or self-reliantly without them.
One does not forgive them (such pure Christianity has never yet been in
vogue); one fights them, and fighting is excellent exercise. So, have
at you all, good braggarts of work done and undone! I am as ready to
give and take the "passado" as any Mercutio on a hot Italian day. Note
or disregard me, I care naught; it is solely for my own diversion, not
for yours, that I come amongst you. I want my amusement as others want
theirs, and nothing amuses me quite so much as the strange customs and
behaviour of the men and women of my time. I love them--in a way; but I
cannot, help laughing at them--occasionally. Sentiment would be wasted
on them; one does not "grieve" over folly and vice any more, unless
one is an ill-paid (and therefore ill-used) cleric, because folly and
vice assume such pettifogging and ludicrous aspects that one's risible
faculties are at once excited, and pity dries up at its fountain-head.
For we live in a little age, and nothing great can breathe in the
stifling atmosphere of our languid, listless indifference to God and
man.

Nevertheless, there is a curious touch of fantastic buffoonery in
everything that temporarily stirs our inertia nowadays. Consider
our Browning-mania! Our Stanley-measles! With what dubious and
half-bewildered enthusiasm we laid the mortal remains of our
incomprehensible "Sordello" to rest in Westminster Abbey! With what
vulgar staring and ridiculous parade we gathered together to see the
"cute" Welsh trader in ivory wedded to his "Tennant for life" in the
same wrongfully-used sacred edifice! Has not our "world of fashion"
metaphorically kissed the cow-boots of Buffalo Bill? and "once upon a
time," as the fairy-tales say, did not the great true heart of England
pour itself out on--Jumbo? A mere elephant, vast of trunk and small of
tail--a living representative of our Indian and African possessions;
sure 'twas an innocent beast-worship that became us well! What matter
if giddy France held her sides with hilarious laughter at us, and Spain
and Italy giggled decorously at us behind their fans and mantillas,
and Germany broke into a huge guffaw at our "goings-on" over the brim
of her beer-mug,--let those laugh who win! And have we not always
won? yea, though (in an absent-minded moment) we allowed Barnum, of
ever-blessed memory, to buy for vulgar dollars that which we once so
loved!

Ah, we are a marvellous and motley crowd at this huge gathering called
Life, dear gossips all!--gossips in society and out of society--a
motley, lying, hypocritical, crack-brained crowd! I glide in among
you, masked for the nonce; I hold my silver draperies well up to my
eyes that the smile of derision I now and then indulge in may not
show itself too openly. I am not wishful to offend, albeit I am oft
offended. Yet it is well-nigh impossible to avoid giving offence in
these days. We are like hedgehogs: we bristle at a touch, out of the
excess of our hog-like self-consciousness, and the finger of Truth
laid on a hair of our skins makes us start with feeble irritability
and tetchy nervousness. Christ's command to "bless them that curse
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you," is to us the
merest feeble paradox; for our detestation of all persons who presume
to interfere with our business, and who say unpleasant things about
us, is too burningly sincere to admit of discussion. I, for my part,
frankly confess to entertaining the liveliest animosity towards
certain individuals of my acquaintance, people who shake my hand with
the utmost cordiality, smile ingenuously in my eyes, and then go off
and write a lying paragraph about me in order to pocket a nefarious
half-crown. I never feel disposed to "bless" such folk, and certes, I
should be made of flabbier matter than a jelly-fish if I prayed for
them.

But then I am not a Christian; please understand that at once. I am a
Jew, a Gentile, a Pharisee, and--a devil! I may be all four if I like
and yet be Pope of Rome. Why not? since these are the days of free
thought, and one's private religious opinions are not made the subject
of inquisitorial examination. Moreover, all classes aid and abet the
truly pious hypocrite, provided his hypocrisy be strictly consistent.
With equal delightsomeness, all creeds, no matter how absurd, just now
obtain some kind of a hearing. We are at perfect liberty to worship any
sort of fetish we like, without interference. We can grovel before our
Divine Self, and sink to the lowest possible level of degradation in
ministering to its greedy wants, and yet we shall not for this cause be
ostracised from society or excommunicated from any sacred pale. With
clerics and with laymen alike, our Divine Self needs more care than our
soul's salvation; for our Divine Self, in its splendid egoism, is a
breathing, eating, drinking, digesting Necessity; our soul's salvation
is a hazy, far-off, dubious concern wherein we are but vaguely
interested, a sort of dream at night which we now and then remember
languidly in the course of the day.

Talking of dreams, one cannot but consider them with a certain respect.
They are such very powerful "factors," as the useful penny-a-liner
would say, in the world's history. We affect to despise them; and yet
how large a portion of the community are at this moment getting their
daily bread-and-butter out of nothing more substantial than the "airy
fabric" of a vision, which in this particular instance has proved
solid enough to establish itself as one of the foundations of European
civilisation.

"_The angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream._"

It is all there. That dream of the good Joseph was the strange
nutshell in which lay the germ of all the multitudinous Churches,
Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, bishops, confessors, priests, parsons,
and last (not least), curates. One wonders (when one is a doomed and
damned "masquer" like myself) what would have happened if Joseph had
dreamed a different dream? or, as might have chanced, if he had slept
so profoundly as not to have dreamed at all? We should have perhaps
been under the sway of Mahomet (another dream), or Buddha (another
dream); for certain it is we cannot do without dreams at any period of
our lives, from the celebrated "deep sleep" of Adam, when he dreamt he
lost a rib to gain a wife, down to the "hypnotic-trance" schools of
to-day, where we are gravely informed we can be taught how to murder
each other "by suggestion." The most abandoned of us has an Idea--or
an Ideal--of something better (or worse) than ourselves, according
to whether our daily potations be crushed out of burgundy grape, or
made of mere vulgar gin-and-water. Even Hodge, growing stertorous and
sleepy over his poisoned beer and _Daily Telegraph_ at his favourite
"public," takes his turn at castle-building, and drowsily muses on
a coming time of Universal Uproar, which _till_ it comes is proudly
called Socialism, when the "sanguinary" aristocrat will be laid low in
the levelling mire, and he, plain Hodge, will be proved a more valuable
human unit than any educated ruler of any realm. Alas for thee, good
Hodge, that thou should'st boozily indulge in such romantic flights of
fancy! Thou, who in uninstructed thirsty haste dost rush to vote for
him who most generously plies thee with beer, what would'st thou do
without the aristocrat or rich man thou would'st fain trample upon?
Who would employ thee, simple Hodge? Another Hodge like thyself? Grant
this, and lo! Hodge Number Two, by possessing the means, the will and
the power to make thee work for him, tacitly becomes thy master and
superior. Wherefore the Equality thou clamourest after, is wholly at an
end if thou, Hodge Number One, dost hire thyself out as labourer or
servant to Hodge Number Two! This is a plain statement, made plainly,
without Gladstonian periods of eloquence; think it over, friend Hodge,
when thou art alone, _sans_ beer and cheap news-sheet to obfuscate thy
simple intelligence.

Nevertheless, it would be cruel to deprive even Hodge of an idea,
provided the idea be good for him. For ideas are the only unalterable
suggestions of the eternal; their forms change, but themselves are
ever the same. One Idea, running through history, built Baal-bec,
the Pyramids, the temples of India, the Duomo of Milan, and in our
own poor day of brag, the hideous Eiffel tower. The idea has always
been the same; to compass great height and vastness of some kind, and
Eiffel has only dragged down to the level of his merely mechanical
intelligence Nimrod's fantastic notion of the Tower of Babel. Nimrod
had a belief that he could reach Heaven. M. Eiffel was convinced he
could advertise himself. _Voilà la difference!_ That "difference" is
the great gulf between ancient art and modern. In the past they went
star-gazing and tried to climb--in the present, we stay where we are,
look after ourselves, and put up an advertisement. Thus has the form of
the idea changed from the likeness of a god into a painted clown--yet,
fundamentally, it is still the same idea. And, reduced to its primeval
element, its first dim, nebulous hint, an idea is nothing but a dream.

Hence I return to my previous proposition, _i.e._, the respect we
owe to dreams, particularly when they result in fixed realities such
as, well!--such as curates, for example. I mention this class of
individuals particularly, because there are so many of them, and also
because they are generally so desperately poor, and (to young ladies
in country parishes) so desperately interesting. What English fiction
would do without a curate or a clerical personage of some kind or
other to figure in its pages I dare not imagine. The novels of other
countries do not produce such hosts of invaluable churchmen, but in
England the most successful books are frequently those which treat
of the clergy, from "Robert Elsmere," who found himself startled out
of orthodoxy by a few familiar and well-ventilated French and German
theories of creed, down to the gentle milksops of the church as found
in the novels of Anthony Trollope and the dreary stories of Miss
Edna Lyall. This well-intentioned lady's productions would assuredly
find few readers were it not for the "old-woman-and-faded-spinster"
fanaticism for clergymen. And yet--I once knew a wicked army man
(worshippers of Edna Lyall prepare to be disgusted! truth is always
disgusting) who for some years amused himself by collecting out of the
daily newspapers, cuttings of all the police reports and criminal cases
in which clergymen were implicated, and this volume, an exceedingly
bulky one, he brought to me, with a Mephistophelian twinkle in his bad
old eyes.

"Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest!" said he. "These fellows in
'holy orders' have committed every crime in the calendar, and the only
mischief I have not found them out in yet is Arson!"

This was the fact. The calm, unromantic statements of the police, as
chronicled in that carefully-collected book of damnatory evidence,
bore black witness against clerical virtue and morality--a "reverend"
was mixed up in every sort of "abomination" which in old times called
down the judgments of the Lord--save and except the one thing--that
none of them had been convicted of wilfully setting fire to their own
or other peoples' dwellings. But I believe--I may be wrong--that Arson
is not a very common crime with any class. It is not of such frequent
occurrence as murder or bigamy--or if it is, it does not attract so
much attention. So I fancy it may be taken for granted that clergymen
are, on the whole, not a whit better, while they are very often worse,
than the laity they preach at--hence their "calling and election" is
vain, and nobody wonders that they are by their proven inefficiency
causing the very pillars of the Church to totter and fall. And has not
Parliament been seriously busying itself with a "Clerical Immorality"
Bill? This speaks volumes for the integrity of the preachers of the
Gospel!

As for me, who am no Churchman, but merely a stray masquerader
strolling through the social bazaar, I consider that all churches as
they at present exist, are mockeries, and as such, are inevitably
doomed. Nothing can save them; no prop will keep them up; neither
fancy spiritualism, nor theosophism, nor any other "ism" offered by
notoriety-hunting individuals as a stop-gap to the impending crash.
Not even the Booth-boom will avail--that balloon of cleverly-inflated
philanthropy which has been sent up just high enough to attract
attention from the gaping Britishers, who, like big children, must
always have something to stare at. Of course, my opinion, being the
opinion of an "anonymous," is worthless, and I do not offer it as
being valuable. In saying things, I say them for my own amusement, and
if I bore any one by my remarks, so much the more am I delighted.
As a matter of fact, I take peculiar pleasure in boring people. Why?
Because people always bore _me_, and I adore the sentiment of revenge!
And that I stand here, masked, a stranger to all the brilliant company
whirling wildly around me, is also for my own particular entertainment.
If I have said anything to offend any of the excellent clericals I see
running towards me with the inevitable "collection-plate," I am sorry.
But I will not bribe them for their good opinion, nor will I flatly
disobey the command received (which they all seem to forget), "Do not
your alms before men." Besides, I have nothing with me just now--not
a farthing. I am only in this great assembly for a few moments, and
my "silver domino," lavishly studded with stars, has cost me dear.
For the completion of churches, and the mending of chancels, and the
french-polishing of pews, I have no spare cash. Walls will not hold
me when I am fain to worship--I take the whole arching width of the
uncostly sky. There are rich old ladies in this vast throng of people,
doubtless?--dear Christian souls who hate their younger relatives,
and who are therefore willing to spend spare cash in order to prove
their love of God. From these gather your harvest while you may, all
ye ordained "disciples of the Lord," but excuse a poor wandering
Nobody from No-land from the uncongenial task of helping to provide
a new organ for parish yokels, and from sending out cheap Bibles to
the "heathen Chinee," who frequently disdains to read them. Let me
pass on--I am not worth buttonholing--and I want to take a passing
glance at things in general. I shall whisper, mutter, or talk loudly
about anything I see, just as the humour takes me. Only I will not
promise any polite lying. Not because I object to it, but simply
because it has become commonplace. Everybody does it, and thus it
has ceased to be original, or even diplomatic. To openly declare the
Truth--the truth of what we are now, and what, in the course of our
present down-hill "progress," we are likely to become; the truth that
is incessantly and relentlessly gnawing away at the foundations of
all our social sophistries--to do this, I say, and stand by it when
done, would be the only possible novelty that could really startle the
indolent and exhausted age. But nobody will undertake it. It would be
too troublesome. One would run so many risks. One would offend so many
"nice" people! True--very true. All the same, neither for convenience
nor amiability do I personally consider myself bound to tell lies
for the mere sake of lying. So, while elbowing a passage through the
crowd, I shall give expression to whatever thoughts occur to me,
inconsequentially or rationally, as my varying moods suggest; moreover,
I shall be very content to glide out of the "hurly-burly," and enter it
no more, when once I have said my say.




II.

SOLILOQUISETH ON LITTLE MANNERS.


One can hardly be among a great number of people more or less
distinguished, without observing the way they move, talk, walk,
and generally behave themselves. And the first impression received
on entering the throng over which the electric light flashes its
descriptive sky-sign "Present Day" is distinctly one of--bad manners;
yes, bad, ungainly, jostling, "higgledy-piggledy" manners. The general
effect (bird's-eye view) is as of motley-clothed lunatics hurrying
violently along to a land of Nowhere. Men stoop and shuffle and
amble from the knees, instead of walking with an erect and dignified
demeanour; women skip or waddle, making thereby an undue exhibition
of purely English feet. In art-collections one sees plenty of old
engravings wherein are depicted gallant, well-shaped gentlemen,
pressing three-cornered hats to the left sides of their lace-ruffled,
manly bosoms, and bending with exquisite deference and stately
deportment to demurely sweet dames, who, holding out gossamer skirts in
taper fingers, perform the prettiest curtsies in response. It must have
been charming to see them thus habitually realising the value of mutual
politeness in everyday life; one would like to witness a revival of the
same. Men lost nothing by outwardly expressing a certain reverence for
women; women gained a great deal by outwardly expressing their gentle
acknowledgment of that reverence. "Manner makyth the man," says the
old adage, and if that be true, then there are no men, for certainly
there are no manners--at least, not among the "upper ten." I am in a
position to judge, for I am somewhat of a favourite at Court, where
manners are not at a very high premium. I can only judge, of course, by
what I see, and in my observations of the fair sex I submit that, not
being a "fair" myself, I may be wrong. Yet I believe it is true that
ladies of high rank and good education are obliged to be taught (three
lessons for one guinea) how to make a proper obeisance to the Queen.
And the lesson is, I presume, too cheap to include any training in the
art of decently polite behaviour during the "wait" before entering
the Throne-room. The impudent push and self-assertion of these "noble
dames" is something amazing to witness: the looks at one another--looks
as bold as those of Jezebel--the scramble, the reckless tearing of
lace, and scratching of arms and shoulders in the heated _mêlée_
is--well--simply degrading to the very name of womanhood. Better,
dear ladies, not to go to a Drawing-room at all if you cannot get to
your Queen without tearing your fellow-woman's dress off her back and
inflicting scars on her unprotected shoulders. Men are better behaved
at the _levées_, but among them all scarce one knows how to bow.
Nevertheless, they are more polite to each other than women are; they
are obliged to be--no man will take insolence from another man without
instantly resenting it.

A strange thing it is to consider how poets have raved from time
immemorial about the "grace" of woman! It is pathetic to see how these
ingenuous verse-writers will persist in keeping up their illusions.
As a matter of fact, in England at least, there is scarce one woman
in a hundred who knows how to walk well. And that one is always such
a "peculiar" object that her movements are generally commented upon
as "affected." To a masculine observer this is very strange. A lady
who bundles up her clothes well behind, exposes thick legs, flat
feet, and ugly boots all at once in order to effect her entrance into
carriage, cab, or omnibus, is, by certain of her own sex, voted "a good
soul," "unaffected," "no nonsense about her," "as frank and simple
a creature as ever lived." But a lady who lifts her dress just high
enough to show the edge of a dainty lace on her petticoat, clean, trim
boots, the suspicion of an ankle, and only the pleasing suggestion
of a leg--she--ah! nasty designing creature! "No good, my dear!" "all
affectation, every bit of her!" "_Look at the lace on her petticoat!_"
This last clause, I have noticed, is always damnatory in the opinion
of super-excellent females with no lace on their petticoats. There is
enough in this suggestion to make even a strolling masquerader pause
and meditate, because, arguing from the point of view taken by many
eminently virtuous dames, it would seem that manners, _i.e._, walking
well, keeping clean, and holding one's self with a certain affable
grace and air of distinction, are indicative of latent cunning. This
curious but popular fallacy applies in England to men as well as women.
The awkward gawk, whose clothes never fit, and who appears to be always
encumbered and distressed by his own hands and feet, is frequently
declared to be a "good fellow," "heart in the right place," "regular
trump," and so forth, as probably he is. I do not for a moment imply
that he is not. But I will maintain that because a man holds himself
well, dresses well, and is perfectly at ease with the appurtenances of
his own body, he need not therefore be "a confirmed _roué_" "a turf
man," or "a club gamester." But this is what he frequently passes for
if he dares to indulge in a suspicion of "manner." In fact, the only
presumable effort of "style" now attempted by the men of to-day appears
to be concentrated in the art of twirling or stroking the moustache
whenever the owner of the moustache perceives a pretty woman. This
little trick is done in different ways, of course; the "twist" can be
rendered insolently, familiarly, aggressively, or with a caressing
feline movement, indicative of dawning amorousness. It is frequently
effective, particularly with schoolgirls and provincial misses, who
have been known to render up their susceptible hearts instantaneously
to one victorious twirl of a really well-grown moustache, but I have
also seen many creditable performances of moustache-twirling completely
thrown away on unappreciative women. It is, however, the only piece
of elegance--if elegance it can be called--indulged in by the true
"masher." And beyond it he never soars. He does not know how to lift
his hat gracefully; he does not know how to enter a room (without
looking vaguely surprised or beamingly idiotic), or leave it again with
any touch of affable dignity. His movements are generally stiff and
ungainly to the very last degree, and, worst of all, he seldom has any
brains to make up for his lack of breeding.

A good position from whence to observe the manners of the time is close
to the right hand of the Premier on the evening of a great crush at
the Foreign Office. If courtly Lord Salisbury be there, you get in his
bow, smile, and cordial handshake the finest essence of diplomatic
urbanity and ease. But when you have exchanged greetings with him and
his gracious lady you have seen nearly all you shall see of "manner."
The throng come tumbling in helter-skelter, treading on each other's
heels, for all the world like an untrained crowd of the "bas-peuple,"
all heated, all flustered, all vaguely staring ahead. Ambassadors,
foreign princes, military dignitaries, jerk their heads spasmodically
on entering the rooms, but evidently have no proper notion of a bow,
while some of them let their arms hang stiffly down at their sides,
and proffer a salutation that seems as though it were the result of a
galvanic wire working their spines by some curious patent process not
yet quite perfected. And the women!--the poets' goddesses! They arrive
in very ungoddess-like bundles of rich clothing, some waddling, some
ambling, some sidling, but only a rare few, a dozen at most, _walking_,
or carrying themselves as being at all superior to their gowns. Most
of these "fair" forget to curtsey properly to their distinguished
entertainers, and the general impression made on the mind of an
observer in looking at the "manner" of their entrance is distinctly
unpleasing. Most of them wear far too many diamonds, a notable sign
of egregious bad taste. A woman I saw there on one occasion wore a
sort of dish-cover of diamonds on her head. (A friend told me it was
a "garland"; it may have been, but it looked like a dish-cover.) Her
hair was straight and flat, and stuck close to her scalp, and beneath
the gorgeous headpiece of jewels was a fat red face profusely adorned
with wrinkles and pimples, on which the diamonds cast a cruel glare.
"Alas, good soul," I thought, as she went glittering past, "thou hast
fallen on the most evil hour of all thy span--the fateful time when thy
jewels are preferable to thyself!"--though, truly, as an unnoteworthy
personage, I may here remark that I do not like diamonds. I own that
a few choice stones, finely set and sparkling among old lace, are
effective, but the woman who can wear a soft white gown without any
ornaments save natural flowers would always carry away the palm of true
distinction for me. I confess my notions are old-fashioned, especially
those concerning women.

Talking of the Foreign Office, there was a terrible man there once
who trod on everybody's toes. He seemed born to do it. He was tall
and powerful, and wore the full Highland costume. I shall never
forget the bow he made to Lady Salisbury--it bent him double in true
Scottish fashion; for a _bonâ-fide_ Scot, you know, always yearns
to cast himself on his knees before a title. It is in his blood and
heritage so to do: the remains of the old humility practised by the
clans to their chiefs what time they were all robbers and rievers
together. This man literally divided himself to do fitting homage
to the Premier's lady--his head sank to the level of the hem of her
dress, while the back part of his kilt (not to be irreverent) rose
visibly in air in a way that was positively startling. The achievement
appeared to alarm some people, to judge by their anxious looks. Would
the noble Highlander ever come straight again? That was the question
that was evidently agitating the observers of his attitude. He did come
straight, with galvanic suddenness too, and marched off on the war-path
through the rooms, planting his foot, not "on his native heath," but on
every other foot he could find with a manly disregard of consequences.
He was a great man, he _is_ a great man; I feel sure he must be,
otherwise he would not have hurt so many people without apologising.

As a matter of fact, there is nothing so rare in these days as
distinguished and affable manners. An Arab thief has often more
external personal dignity than many an English peer. In some of
the best houses in the land I have seen the owners of the stately
surroundings comport themselves with such awkward sheepishness as to
suggest the idea that they were there by mistake. I have seen great
ladies sitting in their own drawing-rooms with a fidgety and anxious
air, as though they momentarily expected to be ordered out by their
paid domestics. When I was "green" and new to society I used to think
somewhat of dukes and earls. I had a foolish notion that the wearers
of great historic names must somehow look as if they inwardly felt
the distinction of race and ancestry. Now that I know a great many
of these titled folk, I have discovered my mistake. I find several
of them vote their "ancestors" a "bore." They carry no outward marks
to show that they ever had ancestors. They might indeed have been
ground into existence by means of a turning-lathe, for aught of
inherited beauty, stateliness or courtesy they exhibit. I have seen
great dukes bulge into a room with less grace than sacks of flour, and
I have watched "belted earls" sneaking timorously after the footman
who announced their lofty names, with a guilty air as though they
had picked that footman's plush pockets on the way. I once heard
a very, very "blue-blooded" duchess run through the items of her
chronic indigestion with as much weight and emphasis of detail as a
brandy-seeking cook. A famous lord, brother to a famous duke, has
shuffled into my study and sunk into a chair with the "manner" of
an escaped convict, and I have had much ado to drag him out of his
self-evident humiliation. He has picked his fingers and surveyed his
boots disconsolately. He has felt the leg of his trouser in doubtful
plight. That his "ancestry" performed acts of valour on Bosworth field
awakens in his flabby soul no pulse of pride. His heroic progenitors
might as well have been tallow-chandlers for all he cares. Yet he is
the living representative of their greatness, more's the pity! I often
wonder what those old Bosworth fellows would say if they could come to
life and see him--their descendant--as he is--with but two ideas in his
distinguished noddle--ballet-girls and brandy-and-soda!

I am here reminded of an incident which in this place may not come
amiss. I happened to be present on one occasion at a luncheon-party
made up chiefly of men, most of them well known in Parliament and
society. Our hostess was (and is) a lady who always has more men than
women at her parties, but on this particular day there was one stranger
present, a lady noted for a great literary success. After luncheon,
when this lady took leave of her hostess and went downstairs into
the hall, it was found that her carriage had not arrived. She waited
patiently, with the footman on guard staring at her. Meanwhile man
after man came downstairs, passed her in the hall as though she were a
stray servant (they had all eagerly conversed with her at luncheon,
and had tried to get as much entertainment out of her as possible),
and never uttered a word. Not one of them paused to say, "Allow me to
escort you upstairs till your carriage comes," or, "Can I do anything
for you?" or, "May I have the pleasure of waiting to see you into
your carriage?" or any other of the old-world chivalrous formalities
once _de rigueur_ with every gentleman. Not one man; except the last
who came down, and who (under the immediate circumstances) shall be
nameless, as he was evidently a fool. Because among the gentlemen who
thus passed the lady by, were Lord Randolph Churchill, Mr. Lockwood,
Q.C., and other "notabilities," so I am forced to argue from this
that it is the very essence of modern "good form" to ignore a lady
(with whom you have previously conversed) at the precise moment when
she might seem to require a little attention. So that the stupid and
ill-bred person was the nameless "he" who came down last, who spoke to
the solitary "damozel," escorted her upstairs again to her hostess,
waited with her, chatting pleasantly in the drawing-room till her
carriage arrived, then took her down to it, put her in, and lifted his
hat respectfully as she drove away. He was not "nineteenth-century
form"--and his "manner" was obsolete. Most people would rather be
considered downright vulgar than what they are pleased to term
"old-fashioned."

Hurry kills "manner," and there can be no doubt that in this day we
are all in a frantic hurry. I don't know what about, I'm sure. We are
after no good that I can see. I have tried to fathom the reason of
this extraordinary and vilely unbecoming haste, and the only apparent
cause I can discover is that we are trying to get as much out of life
as possible before we die. The means, however, entirely defeat the
object. We have no time to be generous, no time to be sympathetic, no
time to converse well, no time to do anything but feed and look after
our own interests, and we get so fatigued in the business of living
that life itself becomes worthless. At least, so it seems to me. I say
we are "all" in a terrible hurry, but this is not quite correct. There
are exceptions to the rule. I myself am one. I never hurry. I "laze"
through life and enjoy it. I never "scramble" for anything, and never
"fluster" myself for anybody. Even now I am sauntering, not rushing,
amidst you all with the utmost ease; I move softly and talk softly,
and, though frequently disposed to laughter, I never snigger aloud.
The loud snigger (sign of "well-bred" hilarity) is the muffled but
exact echo of the donkey's bray. It resembles it in tone and sense and
quality. I avoid it; because, though a donkey is an exceedingly clever
beast and much maligned, his voice might be easily surpassed. As it is,
_au naturel_, it does not appear to me worth imitating.

And now, pardon me, sirs and dames, but as I perceive a small crowd of
you engaged in the truly English occupation of staring, not at me, but
at my glittering domino, and as I do not wish to create an obstruction,
I will, with your very good leave, pass on. Observe how quietly I
glide; with only the very faintest rustle of my "star-spangled"
wrappings; striving not to tread on anybody's corns, carefully winding
my way in and out the busy throng, and only holding myself a little
more erect than some of you, because--well! because I have no favours
to ask of anybody, and therefore need not trouble myself to acquire the
nineteenth-century skulk and propitiatory grin. And so--on through the
motley!




III.

PRONOUNCETH ON LESSER MORALS.


I think if everybody would only be as frank as I am, they would
confess we haven't such a thing as a Little Moral left, except in the
copy-books. Big Morals are everywhere, writ large for all the world
to see; we don't trouble about them because they do not individually
concern us--they are merely the names and forms that help to keep
things going. But little morals are gone out of fashion entirely. It
is rather perplexing when we come to think of it. Because we ought
to be moral, strictly moral; and feeling that we ought to be, we
have to pretend that we are. Sometimes we find it difficult to keep
up the game, but as a rule we succeed fairly well. Only we know, you
know, that a "little moral" is a bore. That is why, in our heart of
hearts, we will have nothing to do with it. For example, it is not
on the lines of "little morality" that we should run up bills. But
we do run them up. Sometimes, too, without the smallest intention of
paying them. It is not in the path of unselfish virtue that we should
give our dear friends wine from the "stores" at "store" prices, while
we carefully reserve our old Chambertin and Chateau d'Yquem for our
own special drinking; but we do this sort of thing every day. And yet
we love our dear friends--oh! how we love them! we would do anything
for them, anything--except produce our Chambertin. And it is not, I
believe, a "little moral," _i.e._, a copy-book maxim, that we should
fall in love with our neighbour's wife. But that is just precisely
the most delightful among our modern fashionable amusements. Our
neighbour's wife is the most interesting woman in our social set.
Our neighbour's daughter is not half so interesting. Because our
neighbour's daughter is generally marriageable; our neighbour's wife
is only divorceable--hence her superior charm. The scandalous and
rude statement, "Whoso looketh on his neighbour's wife to lust after
her, hath already committed----" No, no! I will not defile delicate
ears polite with pure New Testament language. It is too strong; it is
painfully strong--quite unpleasant--a thunderous speech uttered by the
holiest lips that ever breathed man's breath, but it is shocking, and
gives our nerves an unpleasant thrill. Because we do look after our
neighbour's wife a good deal nowadays; "neigh" after her is the old
Scriptural term for our latter-day custom, which has been set in vogue
by the most distinguished examples of aristocracy among us. And our
neighbour's wife's husband is a capital butt for our "chaff"; we like
him, oh yes, we always like him: we go and stay with him for weeks, and
shoot game in his preserves, and ride his best horses; he is a capital
fellow, by Jove, but an awful fool. Yes, so he is. Our neighbour's
wife's husband is generally a fool. His dense noddle never discerns
any way out of his dishonour but the crooked path of the law. I haven't
got a wife--praise be to heaven!--but if I had, and I found any "noble"
personage disposed to "neigh" after her, I know what I should do with
him. I should trounce him with a tough cowhide thong till his "blue
blood" declared itself, till his "nobility" roared for mercy. Whether
he were prince, duke, lord, or plain "Mister," he would be black as
well as "blue" before I had done with him. Of course the law would have
to come in afterwards by way of a summons for assault, but who would
not pay liberally for the satisfaction of thrashing a low scoundrel?
Besides, viewed in the most practical light, it would cost less than
the business of divorce, besides having the immense advantage of giving
no satisfaction to the guilty parties concerned.

By Heaven, there are some men I know whom I would kick in the way
of pure friendship, if a kick would rouse them to a sense of their
position--men whose wives are openly shamed, the whole public knowing
of their flagrant, unblushing infidelity--men who stand by and look
on at their own disgrace, and yet presume to offer the "example" of a
public career to the "lower" classes. And how these "lower" despise
them; how they who still do call a spade a spade are filled with honest
scorn for such "distinguished" cowards! Well, well, I shall do no
good, I warrant, by heating my blood in the cause of the worthless and
degraded; fidelity in wives, manly principle in husbands, are "little
morals," and seem to have gone out with the jewelled snuff-boxes and
rapiers of old time.

Among other of these "little morals" it used to be tacitly understood
that "gentlemen" should preserve a certain delicacy of speech when
conversing before "ladies." This idea appears to be almost obsolete.
Men have no scruple nowadays in talking about their special ailments to
women (and not old women either), and they will allude to the various
parts of their bodies affected by those ailments in the most frankly
disgusting manner. At a supper-party given by one of the most exalted
of noble dames not long ago, I heard a brute detailing the ins and
outs of his "liver" trouble to an embarrassed looking young woman of
about eighteen. As for the ugly word "stomach," it is commonly used in
various circles of the _beau-monde_, and the most revolting details
of medicine and surgery are frequently dealt with in what used to be
termed "polite conversation." That ugly old women, and fat, greasy
matrons love to chatter about their own and their friends' illnesses,
is of course an accepted fact, but that men should do so before a
casual company of the married and unmarried "fair" is a new and highly
repulsive phase of "social intercourse." I remember hearing the editor
of a well-known magazine talk with a pretty young unmarried woman
concerning the possibilities of her sex in Art, and after the utterance
of many foolish platitudes, he brought his remarks to a brusque
conclusion with the following words: "Oh yes, I admire gifted women,
but, after all, their genius is bound to be interfered with and marred
by the _bearing of children_." Coarse ruffian as he was, I suppose the
surprised, hot blush that stained the poor girl's face was agreeable
to his low little soul, while I, for my part, yearned to knock him
down. His words, and above all, his manner, implied that he in his
fatuous mind considered every woman bound, willy-nilly, to submit
herself to the passions of man, be she saint or sinner. "The bearing
of children," as he put it, is, according to natural animal law, the
prime business of the average woman's life, average women being seldom
fit for anything else. But it has to be conceded that there are women
above the average, who, gifted with singular powers of ambition and
attainment, sweep on from one intellectual triumph to another, and do
so succeed in quelling the natural animalism that they do not consider
themselves bound to "bring forth and multiply" their kind. With
brilliant, fiery-souled Bashkirtseff, they exclaim: "Me marier et avoir
des enfants! Mais chaque blanchisseuse peut en faire autant!"

And in her next sentence the captive genius cries: "Mais qu'est ce que
je veux? Oh, vous le savez bien. Je veux la gloire!" And "la gloire,"
despite the opinions of the vulgar little editor aforementioned, does
not precisely consist in having babies, in hushing their frantic yells
hour after hour, and wiping their perpetually dribbling noses, what
time the fathers of these "blessings" sleep and snore in peace. "La
gloire" assumes an inviting aspect to many feminine souls to-day, and
the "joys of marriage" pale in comparison. It is rather a dangerous
seed to sow, this "la gloire," in the hitherto tame fields of woman's
life and labour, and the harvest promises to astonish the whole world.
That is, provided women will be original and not imitate men. At
present they imitate us too closely, and even in the question of coarse
freedom of speech they ape the masculine example. If a man insists
on talking about his "liver" a woman will bring her "leg" into the
conversation in order to be even with him. The vulgar word "ripping"
slips off the tongue of a well-bred young woman as easily as though she
were a rough schoolboy. And so on through the whole gamut of slang. As
a casually interested spectator of these things, I would respectfully
inform the "fair" that as long as they elect to "follow" instead of
"lead," so long will their efforts to attain eminence be laughed at and
contemptuously condemned. A painful flabby-mindedness distinguishes
many of the sex feminine, an inviting readiness to be "sat upon" which
is perhaps touching, but also ridiculous. If you take up an art,
dear ladies, you require to be strong if you ever wish to consummate
anything worth doing. Art accepts no half measures. You will need to
live solitary and eat the bread of bitterness, with tears for wine.
Consolations you will have doubtless, but they will come slowly, and
not from without, only from within. An ethereal ice-air will surround
and sever you from the common lot, you will be lifted higher and
higher into a cold, pure atmosphere that will require all your force
of lung to breathe without losing life in the effort. If you can stand
it--well! if not, better be Bashkirtseff's "blanchisseuse qui pent
faire autant."

Is it worth while, among "little morals," to mention gambling? I
trow not? Everybody gambles, from the men on the Stock Exchange to
the princes of the blood. We gamble on the turf, in the clubs, and
in our own homes, with the most admirable persistency. Any trifling
excuse serves, as, for example, a man asked me the other day to risk a
sovereign on the question as to whether a certain music-hall artiste's
Christian name began with a P. or a W. I declined the offer, not being
interested in music-hall artistes. And this brings me to a final point
in our "little morals," namely, the point of considering how utterly
and finally some of us have kicked over the traces with regard to
preserving the respectability and virtue of our women. We frequently
allow women to do things nowadays that may, or will, in the end
degrade them, while we put obstacles in all directions to retard their
elevation to distinction in the arts or sciences. We hate the idea of
their having a voice in the government of the country, but we do not at
all mind their appearing half naked to dance before us on the stage.
We are hardly civil to the young daughters of our aristocratic host,
but we will make a countess of the public dancer of "break-downs."
We will only arrive at an intimate friend's ball in time to eat his
supper, but we will hang about for hours to stare at an advertised
"beauty barmaid." Yet I should not say "we," since I am not guilty of
these things. I am not fond of music-halls, though I confess to finding
them more entertaining than Mr. Irving's hydraulic efforts at tragedy.
Still I daresay my good friend Gladstone patronises them more than I
do. Again, I am not devoted to barmaids. I may here remark a trifling
particular connected with "little morals" which has often struck me.
It is this. A "man about town" will kiss a pretty housemaid or any
other "low-class" woman he fancies without considering himself demeaned
by the act. Now, how is it that a lady of equal position never wishes
to kiss a footman or a waiter at a restaurant? One would think the
situation as tempting to one sex as another. But no. The "lady" would
consider herself insulted if kissed by a footman; the "gentleman"
chuckles with ecstasy if kissed by the housemaid. Why is this thus? I
am inclined to think that here the "fair sex" score the winning number
in the trifling matter of self-respect.

And now we have come soundly upon the cause of our open disregard of
"little morals." It is this: loss of self-respect. We do not respect
ourselves any longer, probably because we do not find ourselves worthy
of respect. We cannot respect a creature who is ready to sell soul,
body, sentiment, and opinion for hard cash, but that creature is
Ourself, in this blessed time of progress. Morals are nowhere weighed
against a fat balance at the banker's. Self-respect is ridiculous if
it opposes the gospel of Grab. What will self-respect do for us? Simply
isolate us from our fellow-men! Our fellow-men tell convenient lies,
cheat prettily, steal their neighbour's wives, and yet walk openly in
social daylight; why should not we all do the same? Where is the harm?
We only hurt ourselves if we try to do otherwise, and, what is far
worse, we are looked upon as fools. We cannot possibly be "in the swim"
unless we are good hypocrites. Herein is my sore point. I am unable
to hypocrise. Candour is part of my composition. It is unfortunate,
because it keeps me out of many delightful entertainments where Humbug
rules the roast. Socrates was not a "social" favourite, neither am
I. I am perfectly aware how unpleasantly tedious I have been all the
time I have talked about morals. They are not interesting subjects of
conversation at any time, and people would much rather not hear about
them at all. True! Only in church o' Sundays are we bound (by fashion's
decree) to listen to discourses on morality by a possibly immoral
cleric, but during the week we are, thank Heaven, free to forget that
morals, little or big, exist. This is as it should be in all civilised
communities. Of course we must keep up the _pretence_ of morality--this
is a necessity enforced by law and police. But we may piously assure
ourselves that our "feigning" is the most perfectly finished art in the
world. No nation can out-rival the English in Sunday-show morality.
It is the severest, grandest, dullest Sham ever evolved from social
history. From its magnitude it commands wondering admiration; from its
ludicrous inconsistency it provokes laughter. And I, strolling idler as
I am, stop an instant to stare and smile, and involuntarily I think of
the Ten Commandments. I believe that on one occasion Moses was so angry
that he broke the tablets on which they were graven. This was mere
temper on the part of Moses; he should have known better. He should
have spared the tablets, and broken the Commandments, every one of
them; as we do!




IV.

OF SAVAGES AND SKELETONS.


Pausing awhile to consider the question, I find that on the whole,
most of you, my dear friends, appear to get on excellently well
without either manners or morals. There you all are, taking your
several parts in the pageant before me, pushing, scrambling, and
making generally the most infernal din, the while you move heaven and
earth to serve your own personal interest and pleasure, regardless of
anybody else's convenience, and you manage to make a tolerably good
show of respectability. Your finished education in the great art of
counterfeiting does everything for you. The sum and substance of modern
culture is in the one line, "Assume a virtue though you have it not."
You all "assume" superbly. And yet the best actors tell us they find
their profession entails fatigue and exhaustion at times, and they are
glad when they can throw aside the mask and take to "rough-and-tumble"
in the secrecy of their own homes. For there is one great fact about
us which we all strive to hide, and yet which is for ever declaring
itself, and that is, that despite all our civilisation and progress, we
are savages still. Absolute barbarians are we, born so, made so, and
neither God nor Time shall alter us. Our education teaches us how to
cover Nature with a mask, even as our innocent Scriptural progenitors
covered themselves with fig-leaves; but Nature is not thereby
destroyed. The savage leaps out at all sorts of times and seasons, in
the tempers and habits of the most highly cultured men and women. "My
Lord," unbracing himself at night and unbuttoning his waistcoat to
give freedom to his ample paunch, hiccoughs himself into bed with as
much rude noise as the naked Zulu who has drunk himself nearly dead
on rum. "My Lady," unclasping her fashionable "corset" and allowing
her beauties to expand, sighs, yawns, shakes herself jelly-wise in
freedom, and plumps between the sheets as casually as any squaw in a
wigwam. And it is probable that both my lord and my lady asleep, snore
as loudly and look as open-mouthed and ugly in their slumbers as any
uncivilised brutes ever born. Old Carlyle's notion of the virtue of
clothes was the correct one. What should we do with a naked Parliament?
The clothes maintain order and respectability, but without artificial
covering the whole community would be as they truly are in their heart
of hearts--savages, and no more.

I think we are all pretty well conscious of this, some of us perhaps
painfully so. And what we are painfully aware of we always try to
conceal. Byron, despite his genius, was always thinking of his
club-foot. So are we always voluntarily or involuntarily, thinking
of our savagery. It will out, still, as I say, we do try to keep it
in. We do most faithfully pretend we are civilised, though we know we
never shall be; not in this planet. The thing is manifestly impossible.
The attraction of sex, the love of fighting, the thirst of conquest,
the greed of power: these things are savage elements, like wind and
fire and lightning; they make up life, and so long as life is ours, so
long shall we be savages at heart--savages in our grandest passions
as well as in our meanest. That is why I am disposed to think the
doctrines of Christianity unsuited to the world, because they are so
directly opposed to natural instinct. However, this is a point I am
quite unfitted to argue upon, being of no creed myself, and very much
of a savage to boot. Personally, I would not give a fig for a man who
had nothing of the savage about him. I have met the kind of fellow
often, especially among the literary set. "Not that I intend to imply,"
as the G. O. M. sayeth, "that under certain circumstances, and given
certain conditions," the literary set cannot be savage--they can be,
and are, but it is a savagery that is mere palaver, and never comes to
honest fisticuffs. The "literary set" are physically timorous, and not
fond of firearms or manly sports; effeminacy and dyspepsia mark these
gifted creatures for their own. They have "nerves," have the bookish
folk, like fine ladies, and with the "nerves" spite and petulance go as
a matter of course. Real, _bonâ-fide_, fierce savagery is infinitely
preferable to the puling whine or the cynical snarl of little poets
and "society" philosophers; and the company of a bluff soldier who has
"faced fire" is preferable to that of a dozen magazine editors.

Gathering my domino closer about me, I gaze steadily over the circling
noisy throng that whirls before me, and I think of wild tribes and
famished hordes scurrying fiercely along through clouds of sand
over miles of desert, and I see very little difference between the
"cultured" crowd and the hungry "barbarians." Desert, or the road
called Custom; sand or dust in the eyes of moral perception--they come
to very much the same thing in the end. Can it be possible that the
present century is "helping on" civilisation? I don't believe it any
more than I believe that the wretches who flung themselves under the
car of Juggernaut went straight to heaven. The most curious and awful
part of the whole spectacle to me is to realise that all this movement,
clamour, and confusion, should be doomed to end in sudden silence by
and by; such silence, that not a sound from any one of these now living
noisy tongues will stir it by so much as a curse or a groan.

Yes, my friends; deny it if you will that we are all savages (I expect
you to deny it because I assert it, and you would not be human if you
did not contradict me), you will hardly refuse to admit that we are all
skeletons. Our flesh makes our savagery. Our clothes make our morality.
But reduced to our primal selves, we are plain Bones. And in honest,
unadorned Bones, to be positive to the utmost degree of positivism, we
invariably discover ourselves grinning. At what? Ah, who shall say!
Unless it be at our own exquisite fooling with fate, which, truth to
tell, is very exquisite indeed. And, however serious we may look in the
flesh, we must remember our own death's-head is always laughing at us.

Death's-heads are jolly companions. Some of my friends are fond of
wearing imitation ones to remind them of the wide perpetual smile they
carry behind their own fleshly covering. One or two charming ladies
I know carry jewelled death's-heads on their watch-chains, and play
with them in a sufficiently gruesome manner. Lady Dorothy Nevill,
she of shrewd Walpole wit and keen intelligence, wears a conspicuous
ornament given her by our own amiable Prince of Wales--a red coral or
cornelian death's-head, with a couple of diamonds in the eye-sockets.
I wonder what Albert Edward was thinking about when he made the lady
this valuable present, and whether the line, "To this complexion must
we come at last," occurred at all to his memory. Lady Dorothy herself
is particularly fond of the suggestive bauble; she perceives and
appreciates as much as I do the delicate irony of a skull's smile.

And it really needs a good deal of intelligence to understand
death's-heads. A duke I know, of the best possible ducal brand, annoys
me exceedingly by his lack of perception in this regard. The handle
of his walking-stick is an ivory skull, and he is always sucking it.
The effect of this act is indescribable. He seems to be mouthing the
dried and polished cranium of an ancestor. I meet him frequently in the
"row," or Snobs' Parade, where gilded youth goes to stare at gilded
age, by which phrase I mean that the foot-passengers are mostly young
and lissom of limb, while the fine carriages frequently contain naught
but the dried and desolate fragments of old age, or the painted and
bedizened wrecks of youth. It is really quite curious to note how few
pretty or even genial-looking persons are seen in the vehicles that
crowd the Row during a "season." Max O'Rell declares that the entire
show is like Tussaud's wax-work taken out for an airing, but I have
never seen any one so good-looking or so clear-complexioned as wax-work
in a carriage. On foot, yes; there are any number of pretty women and
tolerably well set-up men to be met with strolling about under the
trees, and it is precisely for this reason that whenever I go to the
Park I walk instead of driving, as I prefer pretty women to ugly ones.

And thus by preamble and general tedium I have come leisurely round to
the point I wished to arrive at, which is the narration of a singular
dream I once had; a vision which fell upon me, not in the "silence of
the night," but in the glaring heat of a midsummer afternoon while
I was seated on a penny chair in the middle of the Row. I had just
exchanged the usual greetings with my kindly young idiot friend the
duke (sucking the ivory skull on his cane as usual) and he had gone
on his way blandly grinning. I had shaken hands with a couple of
vagrant journalists. I had saluted a few charming women, chatted for
ten minutes with Lord Salisbury, and had imparted to a dear paunchy
diplomat the secret of stewing prawns in wine--a dish which I assure
you, on the faith of a true _gourmet_, is excellent. I had studied
the back of a massively fat woman's dress for several seconds, trying
to puzzle out the ways and means by which it got fastened over so
much rebellious flesh. Fatigued with these exertions, and lulled by
the monotonous noise of the rolling wheels of the carriages going to
and fro, I fell into a sort of semi-conscious doze, in which I was
perfectly aware of my surroundings, though more than half asleep. And
"a change came o'er the spirit" of the scene--a change which might
have alarmed unphilosophic people, but which to one like myself,
who am surprised at nothing, merely transformed a dull and ordinary
spectacle into a deeply interesting one. A curious white light pervaded
the atmosphere and tinged the overhanging foliage with a sickly shade
of green, the yellow sunshine took upon itself a jaundiced hue, and
lo! all suddenly and straightway the "row" was stripped of its "too,
too solid flesh" and appeared as too, too truthful Bones. Bones were
the fashion of the hour--skulls the order of the day. Clothes were
worn, of course, for decency's sake, clothes, too, of the very newest
fashion and cut; but flesh was discarded as superfluous. And so the
most elegant Paris "creations" in the way of lace parasols shaded
the sun from the delicate female death's-heads; skeleton steeds in
gorgeous trappings worked their ribs bravely, guided along by skeleton
coachmen superb in plush and wigs well powdered; and dear antiquated
Lady Doldrums, as she turned her eye-sockets to right and left with a
pleasant leer, seemed to be more cheerful than she had been for many a
long day. She still wore her favourite style of youthful hat, pinched
artistically about the brim and turned up with artificial roses,
but these handsomely-made French flowers now nodded quite waggishly
against her bare jaws, knowing there was no longer any painted flesh
there to eclipse their colour. Yes, Lady Doldrums was herself at
last--the terrible strain of pretending to be young was over, and the
only _coquetterie_ she practised in her honest condition of Bones,
was the wielding of a fan in her grisly sticks of fingers, not for
heat's sake--no, merely to keep away the flies. And the wonderful
crowd thickened every moment--bones, bones, nothing but bones;--they
multiplied by scores, and I began to find out a few of my dear society
friends by the armorial bearings on their carriages. I could guess
nothing by their faces, as these were nearly all alike, and there
was no variety of expression. True, there were short jaws and long,
high foreheads and low, wide skulls and narrow, but I was unable to
guide myself entirely by these hints. I found out Randolph Churchill,
though, in a minute, but then his head is of a curious shape one does
not easily forget. I should know his skull anywhere as thoroughly as
the gravedigger in _Hamlet_ knew Yorick's. He looked very cool and
comfortable in his bones, I thought. So did the delightful _danseuse_
who followed close behind him in a high-wheeled trap, with the
smartest little skeleton "tiger" possible to conceive, pranked out in
livery, an impudent little top-hat perched jauntily on his impudent
little half-grown skull, while as for the exquisite "dancing-girl"
herself, good heavens! her bones were positively fascinating! The wind
whistled in and out them with a breezy amorousness--and then her smile
was more than usually perfect owing to the admirable set of false
teeth which were so dexterously screwed into her jaw. It would take
years of mouldering away to loosen those teeth, and the mouldering
had evidently not yet begun. She wore a wig too--a bronze-red wig in
beauteous curl--and upon my soul, she looked almost as well arrayed
in bones as in her usual heavily enamelled flesh. Very different was
the aspect of the toothless old bundle that came after, seated in a
springy victoria, and wrapped in rich rugs to the chin. His skeleton
steeds pranced nobly, his skeleton coachman sat stiffly upright,
his skeleton footman preserved the accustomed dignified cross-armed
attitude, but he himself, poor wretch, rolled uneasily from side to
side, till it seemed that his yellow skull would sever itself from
the spinal attachment and fall incontinently into his own shaking
claws. I recognised him by the showy monogram on his carriage-rug; he
was the rich proprietor of several newspapers, the "impresario" of
several music-halls, and the dotard lover of several ballet-girls.
After him came a "four-in-hand," a marvellous sight to see with its
skeleton team, its "lordly" skeleton driver, and its "select" party
of skeleton "professional beauties" on top. It made quite a white
glare as it passed in the sickly sun, and scattered a good deal of
bone-dust from its wheels. Quite close to me there were a couple of
skeletons engaged in love dallyings of the most ethereal description.
The one, a female, was seated in a victoria, sheltering the top of her
skull (on which a fashionable bonnet was perched) with a black lace
parasol lined in crimson--a tint which flung a rouge-like reflection
on her fleshless but still sensually-shaped jaws. The other, a man,
clothed in "afternoon visiting" costume, leaned tenderly towards her
over the park-railing, proferring for her acceptance a spray of white
lilies which he had taken from his button-hole, and which he held
affectionately between his dry bone fingers. Anything more sublimely
chaste, yet "realistic," can never be imagined. The way their two
skulls nodded and grinned at each other was intensely edifying--it
was a case of purely "spiritual" love and platonic desire, in which
the wicked flesh had no existing part. And one of the most remarkable
features of the whole pageant was the intense stillness which
pervaded the movements of the elegant bony throng of "rank, beauty,
and fashion." Not a leaf on the trees rustled, not a joint in any
distinguished skeleton cracked. Two skeleton policemen kept order,
and the crowd itself kept silence. The skeleton horses rubbed against
each other in the press, but not a bone clattered, and not a wheel
grated. As noiselessly as mist or rolling cloud, the white-ribbed,
motley-clothed multitude moved on; the foot-passengers were skeletons
also, and 'Arry, turning empty eye-sockets about, looked quite as
"noble" as my lord the duke in his barouche, somewhat more so in fact,
though wearing shabbier clothes. A delightful equality ruled the
scene--a true "fraternity," fulfilling some of the socialistic ideas
to the letter. For once the "row" had cast off hypocrisy, and appeared
in its absolutely real aspect--everybody had found out everybody
else--there was no polite lie possible; frank Bones declared themselves
as Bones, and nothing more. Moreover, each skeleton was so like its
neighbour skeleton that there were really no differences left to argue
about. The famous beauty, Lady N., could no longer scowl at her rival,
the Duchess of L., because they looked precisely similar, save for a
trifling difference in length of jaw, and also for the more impressive
fact that one wore blue and the other grey. The bones were the same in
each "fair" composition, and as bones, the two ladies were, or seemed
to be, amiable enough--it was only the wretched flesh that had made
them quarrelsome. And of all things, the chief thing that was truly
beautiful to witness was the universal smile that beamed through the
vast assemblage. Never had the "row" presented itself to broad daylight
with such a sincerely unaffected, all-pervading Grin! From end to end
the grin prevailed--horses, dogs, and men--there was not one serious
exception. Into the air, into the very sky, the wide, perpetual, toothy
smile appeared to stretch itself out illimitably, everlastingly: like
a grim satire carved in letters of white bone, it seemed to inscribe
itself upon the blue of heaven; a mockery, a savagery, a protest, a
curse, and a sneer in one, it spread itself in ghastly dumb mirth to
the very edge of the far horizon, till I, watching it, could stand
the death's-head jollity no longer. Starting in my chair, I uttered
a smothered cry, and awoke. A friendly hand fell on my shoulder--a
pair of friendly eyes twinkled good-humouredly into mine. "Hullo! Were
you asleep?" And there beside me stood Labby--the genial Labby--with
"Truth" glittering all over him. Should I tell him of my queer vision,
I thought, as I took his arm and strolled away in his ever-delightful
company? No. Why should I bother him with the question of honest Bones
_versus_ dishonest Flesh? He was (and is) already too busy exposing
Shams.




V.

HOW NAMES ARE SUPERIOR TO PERSONS.


"What's in a name?" sighed the fair Juliet of Shakespeare's fancy. She
was very much in love when she propounded the question, so she must be
excused for coming to the conclusion that a name meant nothing. But
no one who is not in love, no one who is not absolutely mad, can be
pardoned for indulging in such an opinion. Romeo was more than his name
to Juliet, but out of romantic poesy, nobody is more than his name as a
rule. The Name is everything; the Person behind the Name is generally
nothing when you come to know him. A fine title frequently covers
the most unpretentious individual. Beginning with the very highest
example in the land, can there be anything more lofty-sounding than
this--"Her Majesty Victoria Regina, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland,
and Empress of India!" The full-mouthed, luscious, trumpet-roll of
this description calls up before the imagination something beyond
all speech to express; visions of great nations, glittering armies,
stately war-ships, kingdoms of the Orient, stores of wealth and wonder
untold--well, and after it all, when you come to stand face to face
with this so tremendous Victoria Regina, you find only a dear, simple
old lady attired in dowdy black, who might just as well be Mrs. Anybody
as the Queen, for all she looks to the contrary. She is a dreadful
disappointment to the young and enthusiastic, who almost expect to see
something of the enthroned goddess about her, with Athene's shield and
buckler bracing her woman's breast, and all the jewels of her Eastern
Empire blazing on her brow. Alas for the young and enthusiastic! They
are doomed to a great many such disillusions. They dream of Names,
and find only Persons, and the fall from their empyrean is an almost
paralysing shock as a rule. There are exceptions of course. There is a
majestic Cardinal in Rome who looks every inch a Cardinal--the others
might be anybodies or nobodies. The Pope is not entirely disappointing;
he has the air of a refined Spanish Inquisitor, a sort of etherialised
Torquemada. He is much more impressive in demeanour than our own
excellent Archbishop of Canterbury, who does not overawe us at any
time. In fact, we are seldom awed by persons at all, only by names.
A small boy of my acquaintance, taken to see the Shah, expressed his
disgust in a loud voice--"Why, he's only a man!" There is the whole
mischief of the thing. Only a man--only a woman. Nothing more. But the
Names seem so much more. Names spread themselves in a large, vast way
over the habitable globe--they are everywhere, while the Persons remain
limited to one place, or else are nowhere. The name of Shakespeare
is so all-pervading that we will not hear of Bacon being substituted
for it, even though Donelly should chance to be right. How well it is
for us that we never knew the Person (whoever he was) that wrote the
plays. Even Homer himself--should we have cared to know him? I doubt
it. His name has proved infinitely better than himself because more
lasting. And so, what slight amount of reverence I have in my nature
I bestow entirely on Names--for Persons I have little or no respect.
A great name possesses a great charm--a great person is generally a
great bore. Any one who takes the trouble to observe society closely
will support my theory of the superiority of names to individuals.
Try the mere sound of several names and see. "The Prince of Wales."
That is a fine historical designation, but, curiously enough, it does
not convey so much in the way of grand suggestions as it ought to do.
Yet he who bears it now is the first gentleman in the land; kindly,
courteous, chivalrous, and a veritable Prince of good fellows.
"Baron Rothschild"--a name suggestive of wealth galore--but the great
financier himself is not such wondrous company. "His Grace the Duke
of Marlborough" hath a pleasing roll in the utterance, but when you
get close to the distinguished biped so designated, you are conscious
of a dismal sense of failure somewhere. "Her Grace the Duchess of
Torrie MacTavish" suggests a "gathering of the clans" and bonfires
on the Highland hills, but her Grace herself is but a little mean
old Scotchwoman, with an avaricious eye upon every "bawbee" expended
in her household. "Prime Minister" is a fine title--"Prime Minister
of England"--the finest title in the world; but Salisbury is the
only man who looks the stately part. The G.O.M. is pure Plebeian--a
big-brained plebeian, if you like, but plebeian to the marrow. The
demagogue declares itself in the shape of his feet and hands, which are
as long and flat as it is the privilege of demagogue hands and feet
to be. Coming to the "dream-weavers," or men of letters, some of us
(young and enthusiastic) breathe the name "Tennyson" with reverential
tenderness, thinking the old man must be well-nigh a demi-god. Not a
bit of it. Crusty and perverse, he will have little of our company,
and against many of those who have bought his books he thunders
denunciation and bars his garden-gate. A little of the exquisite
vanity of old Victor Hugo, who used to show himself to passers-by
at his window, would better become our veteran Laureate than his
hermit-like sourness. "Ruskin" is another great name--but who can count
the intense disappointments entailed on ardent admirers of the Name
when they discover the Person! "Swinburne" suggests poetry, romance,
wild and wondrous things--a bitter awakening awaits those who will
insist on peering behind the Name to see the bearer thereof. And it
is nearly always so. Names open to us the gates of the Ideal--Persons
shut us up in the dungeon of Commonplace. Few famous people come up to
their names--still fewer go beyond them. If ever I chance to meet a
celebrated man or woman whose personal charm fascinates me more than
his or her celebrated name, I shall make a great fuss about it. I
shall--let me see, what shall I do?--why, I shall write to the _Times_.
The _Times_ is the only correct threepenny outlet for ebullitions of
sincere national feeling. But till I am otherwise convinced, I adhere
to my expressed opinion that Names are the chief motors of social
influence, and that individuals are of infinitely less account. Thus,
I think it a thousand pities that Stanley did not meet with the good
old style of melo-dramatic hero's death in the Dark Continent. His Name
might have become a glory and a watchword--as matters now stand his
Person has extinguished his Name.

Yes, my dear friends all, I assure you, on my honour as an honest
masquer, that both my opinion and advice in this matter are well worth
following. When you have selected a Name to hold in some particular
reverence, you will be unwise if you try to peep behind it in search
of the person belonging to it. The Name is like the door forbidden to
Bluebeard's wife: once opened, it shows no end of horrors, headless
corpses of good intentions weltering in their blood, and hacked
limbs of fine sentiment mouldering on the floor. Keep the door shut
therefore. Never unlock it. Let no light fall through the crannies.
Stand outside and worship what you imagine may be within. Do as I
do--know as many Names as you like and as few Persons as possible.
Life is more agreeable that way. For example, if you wanted to find
_me_ out, and you were to peep behind my name and tear off my domino,
you would only be disappointed. You would find nothing but--a person;
a Person who might possibly be your friend and might equally be your
foe. 'Twere well to be wary in such a doubtful business. Best accept me
as I appear, and entertain yourselves with the notion that there may
be a "Somebody" hidden behind the mask. Make an "ideal" of me if you
choose--ideal saint, or devil, whichever pleases your fancy, for I have
no taste either way. Only, for Heaven's sake, remember that if you do
persuade yourselves into thinking I am a Somebody, and I turn out after
all to be a Nobody, it is not my fault. Don't blame me; blame your own
self-deception. Inasmuch as it is especially necessary in my case to
bear in mind that the Name is not the Person.




VI.

CONVERSETH WITH LORD SALISBURY.


Excellent and courteous friend, one moment, I beseech you! I know
how busy you are, but I also know, much to my satisfaction, that,
like a true diplomat and wise man, you give ear to all, even to fools
occasionally, inasmuch as from fools sometimes emanate certain snatches
of wisdom. Therefore pause beside me for an instant with the patient
grace and friendliness I am accustomed to from you; for though I call
myself a fool with the heartiest good will, you have often thought and
spoken of me otherwise, for which condescension I thank you. It is
something to have won your good opinion, inasmuch as you are guiltless
of "booming" second-rate literature, in the style of the venerable
Woodcutter of Hawarden, for the sake of bringing yourself into notice.
Indeed, I think the admirable qualities of your head and heart have
hardly been sufficiently insisted upon by the party you serve. And the
genius of patriotism and love of Queen and country which inspire your
spirit--are these rightly, fairly, acknowledged? No. But what can you
or any one else expect from the weak, vacillating souls you are called
upon to lead, such as Randolph Churchill, for example, whose political
career is but a disappointment and mockery to public onlookers. I
consider that you fight single-handed. Your endeavours are noble and
fearless, but those who should support you are for the most part
cowards--and not only cowards, but selfish cowards; for to some of your
party whom I know, a matter of digestion is more paramount than the
good of the country. When a leading Conservative finds himself slightly
bilious through over-eating, he hastens away abroad, there to nurse his
miserable physical ills and pamper his worthless carcase, regardless
of, or indifferent to, the fact that, by virtue of his position, if not
his brains, his presence in England might be useful and valuable. There
are numerous such lazy hounds in your party, my dear Lord, who deserve
to be lashed with the whip of a Fox's or a Pitt's eloquence. And I have
wondered oft why you have not spoken the lurking reproach against them,
the indignant "Shame on you all!" that must have frequently burned for
utterance in your mind.

And "shame on you all!" is the cry that leaps to the lips of every true
Briton who thinks of the former historical glories of his country,
and at the same time observes the lamentable unsteadiness, the lack
of courage, the dearth of principle in politicians of every grade
to-day. Parliament gabbles; it does not speak. Often it resembles a
cackling chorus of old women striving to describe their own and their
friends' various ailments. Why is Radicalism rampant? Why is there
any Radicalism? Because so many Radicals are honest, hard-working
men--honest in their opinions, honest in the utterance of those
opinions, honest in thinking that their cause is good. And you, my
dear Lord, have a certain sympathy with this active, energetic, vital,
if wrong-headed honesty--you know you have. You love your Sovereign,
you love your country, you love the constitution, but for all that you
cannot but sympathise with integrity. You know that the Monarch has
left England pretty much to itself for the last thirty years, and that
she has allowed the people to realise that they can get on without
her, seeing she will take no part with them in their daily round. A
pity! but the evil is done, and it is too late to remedy it. There is
practically no social ruler of the realm, and you must confess, good
Salisbury, that this fact makes your work difficult. The mass of the
people can only be got to understand a monarch who behaves like one,
and the more intellectual food you put into them, the more obstinate
they become on the point. With similar pigheadedness they can only
understand the personality of a prince whose conduct is a princely
example; they are quite sure about themselves here, and have the most
appallingly distinct notions concerning right and wrong. They do not go
to church for these notions--no. Many cobblers and coalheavers would
be mentally refreshed if they were allowed to kick a few seeming-holy
clerics whose hypocrisies are apparent despite sermons on Sunday. It
must not be forgotten that education is making huge strides among the
populace; it has got its seven-leagued boots on, and is clearing all
manner of difficulties at a bound. When your greengrocer studies Plato
o' nights, when your shoemaker carries the maxims of Marcus Aurelius
about in his pocket to refresh himself withal in the intervals of
stitching leather, when the wife of your butcher sheds womanly tears
over Keats' "Pot of Basil," a poem which the "cultured" dame has "no
time" to read--these be the small signs and tokens of a wondrous
change by and by. Cheap literature, especially when it is a selection
of the finest in the world, is a dangerous "factor" in the making
of revolutions, and among other purveyors of literary food for the
million, one who calleth himself Walter Scott, of Newcastle-on-Tyne,
is unconsciously doing a curious piece of work. He is putting into the
hands of the "lower classes," for the moderate price of one shilling
(discount price ninepence) small volumes well bound and well printed,
which contain the grandest thoughts of humanity, such as "Epictetus,"
"Seneca," Mazzini's "Essays," "Sartor Resartus," "Past and Present,"
the "Religio Medici," the Emerson "Essays," and what not--and it is
necessary to take into consideration the fact that the people who buy
these books read them. Yes, they read them, every line, no matter how
slowly or laboriously; for whether they have expended a shilling or
the discount ninepence, they always want to know what they have got
for their money. This is the peculiar disposition of the "masses";
the "upper ten" are not so particular, and will lay out a few guineas
on Mudie by way of annual subscription, getting scarce anything back
of value in exchange. After this fashion, too, the "upper ten"
entertain the ungrateful, keep horses and carriages for display, and
trot the dreary round of season after season, striving to extract
amusement from the dried-up gourd of modern social life, and finding
nothing in it all but a bitter jest or a sneering laugh at the slips
in morality of their so-called "friends" and neighbours. And thus it
is, my dear Lord, that the balance of things is becoming alarmingly
unequal; the "aristocratic" set are a scandal to the world with their
divorce cases, their bankruptcies, their laxity of principle, their
listless indifference to consequences; they never read, they never
learn, they never appear to see anything beyond themselves. Whereas
the "bas-peuple" _are_ reading, and reading the books that have helped
to make national destinies--they _are_ learning, and they are not
afraid to express opinions. They do not think a duke who seduces his
friend's wife merely "unfortunate"--they call him in plain language
a low blackguard. They cannot be brought to believe that the heir
to a great name who has gambled away all his estates on the turf a
"gentleman"--they call him a "loose fish" without parley. Now you,
excellent and true-hearted Salisbury, have to look on two sides of
the question. On the one are your own people, the aristocrats, the
Tories, lazy, indifferent, inert, many of them--fond of what they term
"pleasure," and as careless of the interests of the country (with a
few rare exceptions) as they can well be. On the other hand you have
the sturdy, loyal, splendid English "masses," who in their heart of
hearts are neither Radicals, Whigs, or Tories, but are simply as they
always have been--"For God and the Right!" It matters not which party
expresses what they consider the Right; it is the Right they want, and
the Right they will have, and they will try all means and appliances
in their power till they get it. And it is with this clamour for the
Right that you, my Lord, sympathise, because you know how much there
is just now that is wrong; how politicians shuffle and lie and play
at cross-purposes simply to attain their own personal ends; how
over-competition is cutting the throat of Free Trade; how foolishly
the tricksters have played with poor distracted Ireland; how openly
we have lowered the standard of society by admitting into it men and
women of well-known degraded reputation, as well as the painted mimes
and puppets of the stage; how wives are bargained for and bought for
a price, almost as shamelessly as in an open market; how good faith,
chivalry, honour, and modesty are every day becoming rarer and rarer
among men; and how, worst of all, we try to cover our vices by a
cloak of hypocrisy--the most canting hypocrisy current in the world.
English hypocrisy, the ultra-pious form--oh! "it is rank; it smells
to heaven!" There is nothing like it anywhere--nothing--no devil so
well sainted by psalm-singing, church-going, Sunday observance, and
charitable subscription lists. The married woman of title and high
degree who sells the jewel of her wifely chastity for the trifling
price of a fool's praise, is ever careful to look after the poor,
and give her "distinguished" patronage to church-bazaars. Pah! such
things are as a sickness to the mind; one's gorge rises at them; and
yet they are, as the Queen said to Hamlet, "common." So common, i'
faith, that we are beginning to accept them as an inevitable part of
our "social observances." And, alas, my Lord of Salisbury, you can do
nothing to remedy these things, and yet it is precisely "these things"
that swell the rising wave of Radicalism. And despite all the power
of your keen, capacious brain, and all the love of country working in
your soul, believe me, the storm will break. Nothing will keep it back;
because, though there are men of genius in the realm, these men are not
permitted to speak. The tyrant Journalism forbids. Why "tyrant"? Is not
Journalism free? Not so, my Lord; it is not the "voice of the people"
at all; it is simply the voice of a few editors. Were the most gifted
man that ever held a pen to write a letter to any of the papers on a
crying subject of national shame, he would be refused a hearing unless
he were a friend of the proprietors of whatever journal he elected to
write to. And men of genius seldom are friends of editors--a curious
fact, but true. And so we never really hear the "voice of the people"
save in some great crisis, and when we do, it invariably astonishes
us. It upsets our nerves, too, for a long time afterwards. It is
always so horribly loud, authoritative and convincing! The "voices of
editors" die away on these occasions like the alarmed squealings of
cats chased by infuriated hounds, and into the place of such a smug
and well-satisfied person as the Editor of the _Times_, for example,
leaps a shabby, dirty, hungry, eager-eyed creature like Jean Jacques
Rousseau, who, instead of a clean and carefully prepared pen, uses for
the nonce a red, sputtering torch of revolution, which, setting fire to
old abuses, spreads wide conflagration through the land. And how the
heart leaps, how the blood thrills, when old abuses _are_ destroyed!
When the rats' nests of cliques are thrust out to perish in the gutter,
when the dirty cobwebs of self-interest and love of gain are swept
down, and the fat spiders within them trampled under foot, when the
great white palace of national Honour is cleansed and made sweet and
fresh for habitation, even at the cost of groaning labour, confusion,
and stress, how one breathes again, how one lives the life of a true
man in the purified strong air!

As you know well, my Lord, I am of no political party. I am proud to be
as one with this great nation in its vital desire for the Right and the
Just. Wherever the Right appears I am its follower to the death. I hate
false things; I hate bubble reputations, empty wind-bags of policy,
dried skeletons of faith. Why not leave this dubious handling of bones
and dusty material? It is too late to set wry matters straight. They
are an obstruction, and must be cleared from the path of England. Had
you the temerity, as I know you have the will, you would speak your
thoughts more openly than you have yet done. You would say: "I refuse
to lead cowards. I will call to my side men of proved brain and honesty
and skill, with whom honour is more than pelf; I will get at the heart
of England, and move with _its_ pulsations; and of those who are not
with this heart I will have none. I will at once make some attempt to
remedy the frightful abuses of the law; I will move heaven and earth
till England, not party, is satisfied!"

And oh, my most excellent friend, what a wise thing you would do, if
you would only keep a watchful eye on the scribblers--the poor and
hungry and ambitious scribblers especially! Your party at all times of
history has been foolishly prone to neglect this sort of inky folk,
and what an error of policy is such neglect! These same inky folk, my
Lord, do cause thrones to fall and empires to tremble, wherefore you
and all whom it concerns should look after them warily. Make friends
with them; soothe their irritated nerves; take time and trouble to
explain a situation to them, and remember, never was there dusty,
crusty writing-biped yet but could not be moved to a pale, pleased
smile of response to a royal hand-shake, a royal greeting, given in
good season. It is not singers and twiddlers on musical strings that
a wise Court should patronise, but the wielders of pens--they, who, if
despised and neglected, take relentless vengeance, and, fearing neither
God nor devil, proceed to make strange bargains with both. The Press
is a plebeian creature--yes, I know; but for all that, it has stumbled
with its big, hob-nailed shoes and Argus eyes into the Royal precincts,
and stands there smacking its greasy lips and staring rudely, after the
fashion of all plebeians unaccustomed to polite society. It is vulgar,
this Press--there is no doubt of that; it dresses badly, and wears, not
a sword by its side, but a stumpy pen stuck unbecomingly behind its
ear, and it gives itself a vast amount of coarse swagger because it is
for the most part deficient in education, and picks up its knowledge
by hearsay--nevertheless it has power. And it is a power which neither
you nor any one else can afford to despise; wherefore, good friend,
when you have any grand object in view and want to attain it, let all
else go if necessary, but gather a grand muster-roll of Pens. These
shall win you your cause if you only know how to lead them, and without
their assistance you shall be lost in a sea of contradictions. Some
of these Pens are already yours to command; but others are not, and
you trouble not your head concerning these "others" which are the very
ones you should secure. As for me, I could go on advising you with the
most infinite tedium on sundry matters, but I will not now, inasmuch
as we shall have frequent opportunities for discourse in the library
at Hatfield. And so, till we meet again, accept the assurance of my
admiration and devoted service. You are one of the noblest of living
Englishmen; you have the kindest heart in the world; your foreign
policy means peace and satisfaction to Europe; and yet, with it all,
and with my ardent friendship for you, I cannot help asking myself the
question whether, if the storm breaks and the waves rise mountains
high, will you have the strength to be a pilot for the ship of England
in her dark hour? And if it should be proved that you cannot steer us,
Who shall be found that can?




VII.

CHATTETH WITH THE GRAND OLD MAN.


Dost thou remember, my dear Mr. Gladstone, a certain warm and pleasant
July afternoon when thou didst honour and oppress me with thy Grand
Old Presence for a couple or more of weary hours, regardless of the
fact that the "House" expected thee to appear and reply on some moot
point or other to Mr. Goschen? There in my modest studio thou didst
sit, rubbing that extensive ear of thine with one long forefinger,
and smiling suavely at such regular intervals as almost to suggest
the idea of there being a patent smiling-machine secreted behind thy
never-resting jaw!

Ah, that was a day! We talked--but no! 'twas thou didst talk, thou
noble old man! and I--as all poor mortals must needs do in thy
company--listened. Listened intently; helpless to remove thee from the
chair in which thou sattest; hopeless of putting any stop to thine
eloquence; while on, on, on, still on, rolled the stream of thy fluent
and wordy contradictions, till my mind like a ship broken loose from
its moorings, rocked up and down in a wild, dark sea of uncertainty
as to what thou didst mean; or whether thy meaning, if it could by
chance be discovered, should in truth be meant? Hadst thou been a
Book instead of a Man, I should have flung thee aside, walked the
room, and clutched my hair after the manner of the intense tragedian;
but with thee, thou astonishing Biped, I could do no more than stare
stonily at thy careless collar-ends and concentrate all my soul on my
powers of hearing. "Listen, fool!" I said to my inner self--"Listen!
It is Gladstone who is speaking--Gladstone the old man eloquent;
Gladstone the thinker; Gladstone the Bible scholar; Gladstone the Greek
translator; Gladstone the Scotchman, Gladstone the Irishman, Gladstone
the--the--the--Wood-cutter! Listen!"

And, as I live, I listened to thee, Gladstone; I swallowed, as it
were, thine every word, in spite of increasingly lethargic mental
indigestion. Specially did I strive to follow thee in thy wild flights
up the stairs of many religious theories, when with gray hair ruffled
and eyes aglare, thou didst solemnly rend piecemeal "Robert Elsmere,"
forgetting, O thou grand old Paradox, that if thou hadst never lifted
up that clamant voice of thine in _Nineteenth-Century-Magazine_
utterance, Robert and his oppressive religious troubles might scarcely
have attracted notice? Didst thou not "boom" Robert, and then feign
surprise at the result? Ay, venerable Splitter of Straws and Hewer of
Logs, wilt deny the truth? And shall I not advise thee in thine own
terms to retire from public life, not "now," but "at present." Or if
not "at present" then "now"? Either will serve, before thou dost make
more blows with thy hatchet-brain (somewhat dulled at the edge) at the
future honour and welfare of thy country.

Ah, what things I could have said to thee, thou Quibble, when thou
didst venture to assail me with thy converse, if thou hadst but
taken decent pause for breathing! Why, amongst other marvels, didst
thou deem it worth thy while to flatter me, or to praise the casual
sputterings of my pen? Thy unctuous insinuations carried no persuasion;
thy "nods and becks and wreathed smiles" were wasted on me; thy soft
assurances of the "certainty of my future brilliant fame" went past
my ears like the murmur of an idle wind. For a fame "assured" by thee
is nothing worth; and thy Polonius-like approbation of any piece of
work, literary or otherwise, is as a mark set on it to make it seem
ridiculous. For thou art destitute of humour save in wood-cutting;
and thou needest many a lesson from my dear friend Andrew Lang before
thou canst successfully comprehend the subtly critical art of proving
a goose to be a swan. And so, by monosyllables slipt in like frailest
wedges between thy florid bursts of ambiguity, I strove to entice thy
wandering wits back to the discussion of personal faith in matters
religious, wherein I found thee most divertingly inchoate, but my
feeble efforts were of small avail. For lo, while yet I strove to
understand whether thou wert in truth a Roman Papist, a Calvinist, a
Hindoo, a Theosophist, or a Special Advocate of the _War Cry_, the
subject of Creed, like a magic-lantern slide, disappeared from thy
mental view, and Divorce came up instead. Frightful and wonderful,
according to thee, goodman Gladstone, are the wicked ways of the
married! No sooner are they united than they move heaven and earth to
get parted--so it is at any rate very frequently in the free and happy
American Republic, where the disagreeing parties need not move heaven
and earth, but simply make a mutual assertion. Oh, of a truth here was
no smiling matter! No Deity in question, but a very positive Devil,
needing thy exhortation and exorcism; and thy jaws clacked on sternly,
strenuously, and with a resolute gravity and persistency that seemed
admirable. Not every man could be expected to find a Mrs. Gladstone,
but surely all were bound to try and discover such a paragon. If
all married society were composed of Mr. and Mrs. Gladstones, why,
married society would realise the fabled Elysium. And supposing there
continued to be only one Mr. and Mrs. Gladstone, and all the rest were
quite a different set of hopelessly different temperaments, then,
naturally, it was impossible to state what disasters might ensue.
It would be a case of Noah and his wife over again--after them the
Deluge. In the interim, Divorce was shocking, abominable, sinful,
diabolical, ungodly--an upsetting of the most sacred foundations of
morality--and it was chiefly because Gladstonian domestic tastes were
not universal. This, at least, is what I seemed to gather from thee
in thine onslaughts against the large and melancholy mass of the
Miserably Married; I say I "seemed" to gather it, because it "seemed"
thy meaning, but as thy whole mode of speech and action is only
"seems," I cannot be absolutely sure either of myself or thyself. For
thou didst set out an attractive row of various learned propositions,
gently, and with the bland solicitude of a hen-wife setting out her
choicest eggs for sale, then suddenly and incontinently, and as one in
a fit of strangest madness, thou didst sweep them up and fling them
aside into airy nothingness without concern for the havoc wrought.
Thou didst calmly state what appeared to be a Fact, reasonable and
graspable; and with all the powers of my being I seized upon it as a
grateful thing and good for consideration; when suddenly thy senile
smile obscured the intellectual horizon, and thy equably modulated
voice murmured such words as these: "Not that I desire to imply by
any means that this is so, or should be so, but that it might (under
certain circumstances, and provided certain minds were at harmony upon
the point) probably become so." Ah, thou embodied Confusion worse
Confounded! Had it not been for this constant playing of thine at thy
favourite shuffling game of cross-purposes, I should have roused my
soul from its stupor of forced attention to demand of thee more of
thy profound Bible scholarship. Whether, for example, if Divorce,
thy bugbear, were ungodly, and the Bible true, a man should not have
two, three, nay, half-a-dozen wives at his pleasure for as long or as
short a time as he chose, and find situations for them afterwards as
servants, telegraph-clerks, and bookkeepers, when their beauty was gone
and snappishness of temper had taken the place of endearing docility.
Whether English harem-life, lately set in vogue by certain great and
distinguished "Upper" people, could not be easily proved pleasing unto
the Most High Jehovah? For did not God love His servant Abraham? and
did not Abraham bestow his affections on Sarai and Hagar? and when the
hoary old reprobate was "well stricken in years" and "the Lord had
blessed him in all things" did he not again take a wife named Keturah,
who presented him in his centenarian decrepitude with six sons?--all
"fine babies," no doubt. What sayest thou to these morals of Holy
Writ, thou "many-sounding" mouthpiece of opinion? Answer me on a
postcard, for with thee, more than with any other man, should brevity
be the soul of wit!

Some of us younger and irreverent folk oft take to speculating why,
in the name of bodies politic, thy days, O Venerable, are so long in
the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee? The Lord thy God, friend
William Ewart, must have some excellent reason for allowing thee to
ruthlessly cut down so many growing oaks of English honour and walk
unscathed across the bare, disfigured country, with the wild dogs of
Democracy sneaking at thy heels. And I forgot, in speaking of the
holy Abraham, that late events have proved the high superiority of
thy tastes in morality to those of God's anciently-favoured servant.
For didst thou not disown thy sweetest nursling, thine own favourite
adopted son, Parnell, simply and solely to publicly clasp and kiss
the wrinkled, withering hand of Mrs. Grundy? And knowest thou not,
thou gray-haired Conundrum, that nothing has ever seemed more
preternaturally absurd to the impartial observer and student of social
life in all countries, than this making a public question out of
personal matter?--this desertion of a former friend, a man, too, of
immense intellectual capability, all because, as the old German ballad
goes, "he loved a, to him, temptingly-forbidden lady"? Just Heavens! I
could name dozens of men (but I will not), party men too, respectably
married likewise, who have their "temptingly-forbidden ladies" tucked
snugly away in the innermost recesses of their confidence, and who
avoid betraying themselves into such impulsiveness as might lead to a
fire-escape and political dissolution. As for Mrs. Grundy, the dear
old soul never sees anything now unless she is led up to it with her
spectacles on; she is more than half blind, and totally deaf--a poor,
frail creature very much on her last legs--and she must have been
vaguely flattered and surprised at thy voluntary Grand Old Hand-Shake,
given to her in the very face of all the staring world of intelligence
and fashion. It must have soothed her aching heart and comforted her
tottering limbs to find she still had left to her a pale vestige of
past power. Ah, it was a grand and edifying party-split!--almost as
exciting as if it had occurred on a question of Beer, which fateful
subject angrily discussed, did, I believe, on one occasion actually
effect a change of Ministry. And it is rather a notable proof of the
curious littleness of the age we live in, that of late, political
parties have seldom broken up on great questions--questions of
momentous and general interest affecting the welfare of the state and
people--but nearly always on petty, personal, nay almost vulgar and
childish disputes, such as might make Fox and Pitt turn and groan in
their graves. Is there no such thing as unadulterated patriotism left,
I wonder?--no real ardent love of the "Mother" England? or hast thou,
old Would-Be Despot, choked it all by thy pernicious gabble?

And yet, whatever may be said of thee now or in after history as a
Man-Enigma, thy bitterest enemy, unless he be an idiot born, can hardly
be blind to thy numerous and extraordinary endowments. Jumbled as
they are together with so much confusion that it is difficult to tell
which savour most of vice or most of virtue, they are nevertheless
Endowments, rare enough to find in any other living composition of
mortal mould. And the mystic gift that keeps thee powerful to grasp
and retain thy dominance over the minds of the Majority, is simple
Genius--a gift of which there are many spurious imitations, but which
in itself is given to so few as to make it seem curious and remarkable,
aye, even a thing suggestive of downright madness to the men of mere
business talent and capacity who form the largest portion of the
governing body. Misguided, captious, flighty as caprice itself, it
is nevertheless a flash of the veritable Promethean fire which works
that busy, massive brain of thine--a kindling, restless heat which is
entirely deficient in the brains of nearly all thy fellow-statesmen of
the hour. This it is that fascinates the Public--the giant Public that
above all the whisperings and squealings of the Press, reserves its
own opinion, and only utters it when called upon to do so, with sundry
roarings and vociferations as of a hungry lion roused--a convincing
manner of eloquence which doth wake to speculative timorousness the
wandering penny-a-liner. For Genius is the only quality the Public
does in absolute truth admire, without being taught or forced into
admiration--and that Genius has ever in reality been despised or
neglected by the world, is, roughly speaking, a Lie. Everything noble
that deserves to live, lives; and Homer wrote as much for the England
of to-day as for the Greece of past time. The things that die, deserve
to die; the "genius" who deems himself ill-used, does by his childish
querulousness prove himself unworthy of appreciation. For no great soul
complains, inasmuch as all complaint is cowardice.

Thus, when I bring the Public well into sympathetic view, and consider
thee in relation to it, O Grand Old Gladstone, I understand readily
enough what is meant by the feeling of the "majority" concerning thy
civic and personal qualifications for power. It is this--that the
people feel, that notwithstanding thy chameleon-like variableness,
and thy darkly cabalistic utterances on the political How, When, and
Why, thou art still the "only" man in the professed service of the
country possessing this talisman of Genius which from time immemorial
has carried its own peculiar triumph over the heads of all opposers.
For when thou shalt be gone the way of all flesh, who is left? Little
brilliancy of wit or good counsel is there now in the Commons, and the
Lords are but weary creatures, bent on maintaining their own interests
in the face of all change. Is there a man who can be truly said to
have the gift of eloquence save Thou? Wherefore the attention and
interest of the people still continue to revolve round thy charmed
pivot, thou Hawarden Thinker, with, as the Scotch say, "a bee" in thy
bonnet. And, whether Premier or Ex-Premier, all because thou _art_ a
Thinker in spite of the bee. Thy thoughts may be "long, long thoughts"
like the "thoughts of youth" in Longfellow's pretty poem--they may
be indeed without any definite end at all, but they are thoughts,
they are not mere business calculations of the State's expenses.
Only being ill-assorted and still worse defined, they are unfit to
blossom into words, which they generally do, to the perplexity and
anxiety of everybody concerned. And there is the mischief--a mischief
irremediable, for nothing will stop thy tongue, thou Grand Old Gabbler,
save a certain Grand Old Silence wearing only bones and carrying a
scythe, who is not so much interested in politics as in mould and
earthworms _à la_ Darwin.

Nevertheless I, for one, shall be exceedingly sorry when this fleshless
"reaper whose name is Death" mows thee down, poor Gladdy, and turns
thee remorselessly into one more pinch of dust for his overflowing
granary. Remember me or not as thou mayest, do me good service or
bad, I care nothing either way. Thy visits to me were of thine own
seeking, and of conversation thou didst keep the absolute monopoly; but
what matter?--I at least was privileged to gaze upon thee freely and
mentally comment upon thy collar unreproved. 'Twas but thy unctuous
flattery that vexed my soul; for Gladstonian praise is but Art's
rebuke. Otherwise I bear thee no malice, though for sundry reasons
I might well do so.... Oh, venerable Twaddler! Didst thou but know
me as I am, would not the hairs upon thy scalp, aye "each particular
hair" rise one by one in anger and astonishment, and thou for once be
rendered speechless?... Nay, good Gladstone-Grundy, have no fear! I
will not blab upon thee; I am well covered, closely masked; and thou
shalt hear no more of me as I slip by, save ... a smothered laugh
behind my domino!




VIII.

OF THE TRUE JOURNALIST AND HIS CREED.


I am very fond of journalists. I look upon them, young and old, fat and
lean, masculine and feminine, as the salt of the earth wherewith to
savour the marrow of the country. And I like to put them through their
paces. I am always devoured by an insatiable curiosity to fathom the
depths of their learning--depths which I feel are almost infinite; yet
despite this infinity I am always fain to plunge. Whenever I see a son
of the ink-pot I collar him, and demand of him information--information
on all things little and big, because he knows all things. I believe he
even knows why Shakespeare left his second-best bed to his wife, only
he won't tell. As for languages, he is everybody's own Ollendorf. He
knows French, he knows Russian, he knows Italian, he knows Spanish, he
knows Hindustani, he knows Chinese, he knows--oh divine Apollo! what
does he _not_ know! Let anybody write a book and try to introduce into
its pages one word of Cherokee, one wild unpronounceable word, and
the omniscient journalist is down upon him instantly with the bland
assertion that it is a wrong word, wrongly spelt, wrongly used. For
the journalist knows Cherokee; he spoke it when a gurgling infant in
his mother's arms, together with all the living and dead dialects of
all nations. So that when I get a journalist to dine with me, is it to
be wondered at that I am consumed by a desire to _know_? The thirst of
wisdom enters into me, and having plied my man with eatables and wine,
I hang on his lips entranced. For can he not tell me everything that
ever was, or ever shall be?--and shall I not also aspire to oracles?

Once upon a time, to my unspeakable joy, I caught a fledgling
journalist; a fluttering creature, all eagle-wings and chuckles, and I
carried him home in a cab to dinner. He was a wild fowl, with plumage
unkempt, and beak, _i.e._, a Wellingtonian nose, that spoke volumes of
knowledge already. I discovered him hopping about a club, and seeing
he was hungry, I managed to coax him along to my "den." When I had him
there safe, I could have shouted with pure ecstasy! He became gentle;
he smoothed his ruffled feathers; he dipped his beak into my burgundy
wine and pronounced in a god-like way that "behold, it was very good."
Then, when his inner man was satisfied, he spoke; and information,
information, came rolling out with every brief and slangy sentence. Of
kings and queens, of princes and commoners, of he and she and we and
they, of fire, police, law, council, parliament, and my lady's chamber,
of all that whirls in the giddy circle of our time, my fledgling had
taken notes--yea, even on the very wheels of government, he had placed
his ink-stained finger.

"O wondrous young man!" I muttered as I heard; "O marvel of the age!
Why do not the kings of the earth gather together to hear thy wisdom?
Why do not the councils of Europe wait to learn the arts of government
from thee? Wert thou at the right hand of Deity, I wonder, when worlds
were created and comets begotten?" ... Here, filled with ideas, I
poured more wine out for the moistening of the Wellingtonian beak, and
demanded feverishly--"Tell me, friend, of things that are unknown to
most men--tell me of the dark mysteries of time, which must be clear as
daylight to a brain like yours!--instruct me in faith and morals--show
me the paths of virtue--explain to me your theories of the future, of
creed--"

I stopped, choked by my own emotion; I felt I was on the point of
comprehending the incomprehensible--of grasping great facts made clear
through the astute perception of this literary Gamaliel. And he arose
in response to my adjuration; he expanded his manly chest, and stood
in an attitude of "attention"; his nose was redder than when he first
sat down to dine, and the vacuous chuckle of his laugh was music to my
soul.

"Creed!" said he. "Drop that! I'm not a church-goer. I've got one form
of faith though." And he chuckled once again.

"And that is?" I questioned eagerly.

"This!"

And with proud unction he recited the following simple formula:--


     I believe in the _Times_.

     And in the _Morning Post_, Maker of news fashionable and
     unfashionable.

     And in one _Truth_, the property of one Labby, the only-begotten
     son of honesty in Journalism,

     Who for us men and our salvation, socially, legally, and
     politically,

     Came down from Diplomacy into Bolt Court, Fleet Street,

     And was there self-incarnated Destroyer of Shams. Labby of Labby,
     Truth of Truth, Very Rad of Very Rad, Born not made, Being one
     with himself and answerable to nobody for his opinions.

     Member for Northampton, he suffered there, secured votes and was
     left unburied,

     And he sitteth in the House, save when he ariseth and speaketh,

     And he will continue with triumph to judge all those that judge,
     both the living and the dead,

     Whose "legal pillory" shall have no end.

     And I believe in one _Pall Mall Gazette_, Pure Giver of frequently
     mistaken information, which proceedeth from pens feminine,

     And which with the soporific _St. James's_, together, exerteth the
     lungs of the newsboys.

     I acknowledge one holy and absolute _Court Circular_.

     I confess one "_Saturday_" for the flaying of new authors,

     And I look for the death of the _Nineteenth Century_

     And the life of a less dull magazine to come Amen.


With this, my journalistic fledgling gave way to Homeric laughter, and
helped himself anew to wine. And since that day, since that witching
hour, I have watched his wild career. I track him in the magazines;
I recognise the ebullitions of his wit in "society" paragraphs; I
discover his withering, blistering sarcasm in his reviews of the books
he never reads; in fact, I find him everywhere. As the air permeates
space, he permeates literature. He is the all-sure, the all-wise, the
all-conquering one. With such a faith as his, so firmly held, so nobly
uttered, he is born to authority. I only wish some one would make him
Prime Minister. Everything that is wrong would be righted, and with
a Journalist (and such a journalist!) at the head of affairs, all
questions of government would be as easy to settle as child's play. He
himself--the Journalist--implies as much, and with all the fibres of my
soul I believe him!




IX.

OF WRITERS IN GROOVES.


There are a certain class of authors who remind me of a certain class
of gamblers--men who believe in a special "lucky number," and are
always staking their largest amounts upon it. To speak more plainly,
I should say that I mean the "groovy" men, who, as soon as they find
one particular sort of "style" that chances to hit the taste of the
public, keep on grinding away at it with the remorselessness of an
Italian street-organ player. I see lots of such fellows in the crowd
around me, and I know most of them personally. For instance, there
is William Black, a distinctly "groovy" man if ever there was one.
All his books are like brothers and sisters, bearing a strong family
resemblance one to another. If you have read "A Princess of Thule" and
"A Daughter of Heth" you have got the _crême de la crême_ of all that
was or is in him. The rest of his work is evolved from precisely the
same substance as is found in these two books, only it is drawn out
into various criss-cross threads of deft weaving; and, deft as it is,
it makes uncommonly thin material. In his latter novels, indeed, there
is so much of what may be justly termed "feminine twaddle," that one
has to look back to the title-page in order to convince one's self that
it is really one of the "virile" sex who is telling a story. Excellent
Willie! With his small head and inoffensive physiognomy, he suggests
an intellectual sort of pint-pot, out of which it would be absurd to
expect a quart of brain. Inasmuch as a pint-pot can only hold a pint;
so let us be grateful for small mercies. And let us admire, not for
the first time either, the persistent kindly confidence of the British
Public, who steadily take up Willie's novels, one after the other, in
the sanguine faith of finding something new therein. "Some day," says
the patient B.P. in its trot to and from Mudie's Library--"some day
Willie will give us a book without a sunset in it. Some day, by happy
chance, he will forget there exists such a thing as a yacht. And some
day--who knows?--he may even awaken to the fact that there are other
places on earth besides Scotland, and other men who are as interesting
as Scotchmen."

Good B.P.! Excellent B.P.! What a heart you have! You deserve the
very best that can be given you for the sake of your tolerance
and cheerfulness of temper, which qualities in you seem truly
inexhaustible. Here followeth an anecdote: A certain flimsy scribbler
I wot of, who had just got himself into a loosely-fitting suit of
literary armour, and was handling his sword a bit awkwardly, as
beginners at warfare are apt to do, said to me one day, with a sort of
schoolboy vaunt, "The Public want _trash_!--and trash is what I'll give
them!" O wise judge! O learned judge! Out he went with his "trash,"
his sword poking into everybody's eye, and his armour waggling
uncomfortably round him, and lo! the Public "took" his trash and threw
it into the gutter, broke his sword for him, gave him back the pieces,
and civilly recommended him to look after the loose places in his
armour. He went home, did that proud warrior, and sat thinking about
what had chanced--it may be he is thinking still.

No, the B.P. don't want "trash"--they want the best of everything--but
they have an infinite kindness and patience in waiting for that
"best," and carefully looking out for it; and when it truly comes they
welcome it with honest enthusiasm. Thus did they welcome and applaud
the "Princess of Thule," because they found it good and charming and
unique, and ever since that time they have reposed quite a pathetic
trust in little Black, hoping against hope that he will give them
something else equally good again. Alas for the vanity of all such
human wishes! for William is a "groovy" man now, and in his groove
he evidently purposes to remain. I remember dining with, him on one
occasion, when, in the ordinary way of conversation, I asked him what
books he had been reading lately? Oh, what sublime amazement in his
rolling eye!

"Read?" he drawled. "I never read. Reading spoils an author's own
style."

Haw-haw! Weally! Good B.P., you see how matters stand? Willie's
"kail-yairdie," or little plot of garden-ground, is barren; its first
crop has been gathered, and no more seed sown by study, so don't expect
any other rich harvests, or look for wonders in such work as "Stand
fast, Craig Royston!" For even brain-soil wants cultivation, if it is
to produce something better than weeds.

Another "groovy" man is William Clark Russell. The waves rule Britannia
in his opinion: The sea occupies his inventive faculty to the exclusion
of everything else. A pigmy Neptune sits on his bald pate, touching
it up with a trident. Sailors' "yarns," sailors' marriages, sailors'
shipwrecks--tales of mariners in every sort of painful and pleasant
situation--influence his mind and bring it into that "One-idea"
condition which is considered by gravely spectacled specialists as a
form of cerebral disease. Moreover, his books bristle with sailors'
jargon, sailors' slang, sailors' "lingo," which people, who are not
sailors and who never intend to be sailors, do not understand and
do not want to understand. However, this monomania of his produced
one good result--"The Wreck of the Grosvenor." He exhausted his best
energies in that book, and having found it a success (as it deserved to
be), settled into the Jack Tar line of writing, and became once for all
and evermore "groovy." The "Wreck of the Grosvenor" is his "Princess of
Thule." He is all there, and there is no more of him anywhere.

At one time I feared, but it was only a passing shudder, that one of
the most brilliant novelists we have, Marion Crawford, was drifting
in the fatal direction of "groove." When the rather lengthy "Sant'
Ilario" came trailing along, after the equally lengthy "Saracinesca,"
I thought, "Alas! and woe is me! Are we never to hear the last of the
beautiful and lovable Astrardente? A noble character, but somewhat too
much of her is here." And I was on the verge of uncomfortable doubt for
some time, for I had always judged Crawford to be of the true Protean
type of genius, capable of touching every string on the literary harp
he holds. And I was not mistaken, for "A Cigarette-maker's Romance,"
that most delicate and delightful work, proves that he is anything
but "groovy"; and his "Witch of Prague" is a breaking of entirely new
soil. So that the more I read of him, the more I am confirmed in the
opinion I have previously ventured to express--namely, that he is our
best man-novelist. I use the term "man-novelist" because I know there
are women-novelists--ladies whom I should be very sorry to offend by
applying the adjective "best" to any member of the viler sex. For I
know also that those ladies, if affronted, have curious and unexpected
ways of revenging themselves, and though I am masked, my silver domino
is hardly proof against the green and glittering eye of a remorseless
literary female. So pray you be not wrathful, sweet ladies!--rather
join with me in gentle chorus, and say, as you know you must, that
the author of "Dr. Isaacs," "A Roman Singer," and "Marzio's Crucifix"
is indeed the least "groovy," and therefore the best "man-novelist"
living; be kind and condescending thus far, for of women-novelists you
shall have a word presently.

Somewhere, once upon a time, I called George Meredith an Eccentricity.
I meant him no harm by this phrase or term--I mean none now, when
I repeat it. He _is_ an Eccentricity--of Genius! Ha! where are you
now, all you commentators and would-be clearers-up of the Mighty
Obscure? An Eccentricity--a bit of genius gone mad--an Intellectual
Faculty broken loose from the moorings of Common Sense, and therefore
a hopelessly obstinate fixture in the "groove" of literary delirium.
A Meredithian description of Meredith is found in his story of "One
of our Conquerors"--a description there applied to the character of
Dudley Sowerby, but fitting Meredith himself exactly. Here it is; "His
disordered deeper sentiments were a diver's wreck where an armoured
subtermarine, a monstrous puff-ball of man, wandered seriously light
in heaviness, trebling his hundred-weights to keep him from dancing
like a bladder-block of elastic lumber; thinking occasionally amid
the mournful spectacle, of the atmospheric pipe of communication
with the world above, whereby he was deafened yet sustained." Of
course it is difficult to grasp all this at once--but I seize upon
the words, "_a bladder-block of elastic lumber_"--I know, I feel
that "_bladder-block_" is Meredith, though I cannot precisely inform
myself or others what a "_bladder-block_" in its original sense may
mean. But meanings are not expected to be vulgarly apparent on the
surface of this "diver's wreck" or new school of prose--you have to
search for them; and you must hold fast to whatever "_atmospheric
pipe of communication_" you can find, in order to keep up with this
"_Monstrous puff-ball of man wandering seriously light in heaviness_."
It has been left to George Meredith to tell us about "the internal
state of a gentleman who detested intangible metaphor as heartily as
the vulgarest of our gobble-gobbets hate it"--and if we would not be
considered "_gobble-gobbets_" ourselves, we must strive to be grateful
for the light he throws on our intellectual darkness. He is supposed
to understand women in and out and all round, so we must take it for
granted that a woman can "breathe thunder." It sounds alarming--it is
alarming--but if Meredith says it, it must be true. And he does say
it. With the calm conviction of one who knows, he assures us that "the
lady breathed low thunder." She is a very remarkable person altogether,
this "lady," called Mrs. Marsett, and her modes of action are carried
on in positive defiance of all natural and physical law. For at one
time we are told "her eye-_lids_ (not her eyes) mildly sermonised,"
and on another occasion she actually "caught at her slippery tongue
and carolled," quite a feat of _leger de langue_. Again, "her woman's
red mouth was shut fast on a fighting underlip." Till I read this, I
was fool enough to think that the underlip was part of the mouth, but
now I know that the underlip is quite a separate and distinct thing,
as it is able to go on "fighting" while the mouth is "shut fast" on
it. She does all sorts of curious things with this mouth of hers, does
Mrs. Marsett; in one scene of her career it is said that "she blushed,
blinked, frowned, _sweetened her lip-lines, bit at the under one_, and
passed in a discomposure." Moreover, this strange mouth was given to
the utterance of bad language, for with it and her "slippery tongue"
Mrs. Marsett said her own name was "Damnable!" and what was still
worse, "had the passion to repeat the epithet in shrieks and scratch
up male speech for a hatefuller," whatever that may mean. Of course,
it is all very grand and mixed and magnificent, if any one chooses to
think so; people can work themselves up into an epilepsy of enthusiasm
over prose run mad _à la_ Meredith, as over poetry gone a-woolgathering
_à la_ Browning. It is a harmless mania which is confined to the
few, and is of a distinctly non-spreading tendency; while those who
are not partakers in the craze can look on thereat and be amused
thereby--for Meredith is at all times and all seasons both personally
and in literature a real entertainment. Whether he be haranguing to
the verge of deafness some stray acquaintance in the Garrick Club;
whether he be met, a greybeard solitary, stalking up the slopes of
Box Hill, at the foot of which he resides; whether he be inveighing
against the "porkers," _i.e._, the Public, within the precincts of a
certain small and extortionate but rigidly pious bookseller's shop in
the town of Dorking; or whether he be visited in his own small literary
"châlet," which he built for himself in his own garden, away from his
house, what time he had a wife, (a very charming, kindly lady, whose
appreciative sense of humour enabled her to understand her husband's
gifts better than any of his wildest worshippers), in order to escape
from "domesticity" and the ways of the "women" he is supposed to
understand--in each and all of these positions he is distinctly
amusing--and never more so than when he thinks he is impressive. Yet
there can be no doubt whatever as to his natural cleverness, and the
original turn of mind which might have made him a distinctly great
writer, if he had not forced himself into the strained style of the
artificial "groove" he has adopted. Even now, if he would only leave
the first spontaneous output of his thought alone, instead of altering
it when it is on paper, and weighing it down with all the big words he
can find in the dictionary, he would probably write something above
the average of interest. However, it's no use being hard upon him, as
he has quite recently been Lynched.[1] I cannot endure his novels, it
is true--but still, I never wished him to meet such a frightful fate.
When we reflect on the barbarity of the institution known as Lynch-law,
we cannot but wonder how his admirers have tamely stood by and seen
him delivered over to so awful a punishment. Yet it is a positive fact
that they have made no defence. And he has been torn limb from limb,
and broken into explained pieces by a pitiless executioner self-elected
to the performance of the abhorrent deed. A woman too--yclept Hannah
as well as Lynch; and eke a spinster--mind cannot picture a more
formidable foe--a more fearful fate! Heaven save you, poor Meredith!
for man cannot. Lynched you are, and Lynched you must be by every word,
sentence and chapter, until you be dead, and may God have mercy on your
soul!

Among other "groovy" men may be included Hall Caine (whose big
"bow-wow" style is utterly unchanged and unchangeable), W. E.
Norris, the pale, far-off, feeble imitator of Thackeray, and F.
C. Philips. This latter gentleman is evidently fast "set" in the
"groove" of naughty but interesting adventuresses. His tale of "As
in a Looking-glass" met with so much success, besides receiving the
extremely questionable honour of dramatisation, that he now indulges
in the error of imagining that all the world must for the future be
persistently eager to know the histories of a continuous succession
of conscienceless ladies like Lena Despard. One of his creations of
the kind, Margaret Byng, might be Lena's twin sister. (According to
the title-page, one P. Fendall would seem to have something to do
with Margaret Byng, but how and where it is impossible to discover.)
Adventuresses for breakfast, adventuresses for dinner, tea and
supper; adventuresses in all sorts of gowns, brand-new or shabby, and
adventuresses in all sorts of difficult situations at all sorts of
seasons--this is the "four-and-twenty blackbirds baked in a pie" kind
of dish, which is what we must expect from Mr. Philips in the future.
This and no more, since he considers it enough. And among "groovy" men,
alas! must be reckoned one of the most delightful of writers, Bret
Harte. The "groove" he chose was at first so new and fresh that we
all felt as if we could never have enough of it; but even in excess of
love there is satiety, and such satiety is our sad experience with the
gifted author of "The Luck of Roaring Camp" and the pathetic "Outcasts
of Poker Flat." We know exactly the sort of thing he will write for us
now--and the charm is broken.

I lay no claim to being possessed of any literary taste, so it will
matter to no one when I say I can see no beauty and no art in Mr.
Hardy's "Tess of the D'Urbervilles." It is an entirely hateful book
in my opinion. Neither can I endure Mrs. Ward's "David Grieve," and
as this lady has undoubted literary gifts, I hope she will for the
future avoid the religious "groove." It is extremely uninteresting,
and is enough to cramp any author's style. Mr. Gladstone, who "boomed"
"Robert Elsmere," apparently has nothing to say for "David Grieve,"
though it seems he can admire such crude performances as "Mdlle. Ixe"
and "Some Emotions and a Moral." But it would never do for us to go by
the taste of the Grand Old Man in these things. He is as variable as
a chameleon. He might call our attention to the splendours of Dante on
one occasion, and directly afterwards assure us that nothing could be
finer in literature than the nursery rhyme of "Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake,
baker's man." Dear old Gladdy! He is the greatest "leader" ever born in
his quality of _mis_leading.

It is difficult indeed to find a writer who is not more or less
"groovy"--that is, one who will not only give us different stories, but
different "styles." And as a rule the men writers are more "groovy"
than the women, though the women are bad enough in their own particular
way. Miss Braddon, for example, is, as every one knows, the "grooviest"
of novelists going--her canvas is always prepared in the same manner,
and the same familiar figures stand out upon it in only slightly
altered attitudes. Her books always remind me of a child's marionette
theatre, having the same set of puppets, who can be placed in position
to enact over and over again the same sort of play. And it is a play
that always amuses one for an hour, when one has nothing better to do.
"Ouida," though she tells all sorts of different stories (of which her
short ones are by far the best), has no difference of style--she is
always the same old "Ouida"--and so will be to the end of her life's
chapter. There are always the same wicked, but exquisitely lovely,
ladies, to whom the marriage tie is frailer and less to be considered
than a hair, and always the same good, pure, and _therefore_ (according
to "Ouida") stupid girls who are just sixteen. There are always the
bold, bad men with "mighty chests" and "Herculean limbs," who covet
their neighbour's wives, or play havoc with the hearts of trusting
maidens--and all these things are told with a gorgeousness of colour
and picturesqueness of description that is not only brilliant, but very
marvellously poetical. "Ouida" holds a pen such as many a man has good
secret reason to envy. There are rich suggestions for both poets and
painters in many of her books--but there is no convincing portrait
of life, except in "Friendship," which was a satirical _exposé_ of
the actual lives of some very questionable and unpleasant people. Yet
"Ouida's" gift was one which might have been turned to rare account had
she studied more arduously in her earlier years; but now, across her
little garden of genius, in which all the flowers have run wild, are
written the fatal words "Too Late."

Another very "groovy" lady novelist is Rhoda Broughton. The
not-particularly-good-looking and "loose-jointed" young man (all Miss
Broughton's heroes are "loose-jointed"--I don't know why) puts in his
appearance in all her books without fail--and there is always the same
sort of distressing hitch in the love-business. The liberties she takes
with the English language are frequently vulgar and unpardonable.
Familiarity with "slang" is no doubt delightful, but some people would
prefer a familiarity with grammar.

A very promising creature was the fair American, Amelie Rives. I say
"was" because she is married now, and I'm afraid she will not write so
well with a "worser half" looking over her "copy." Her story, "Virginia
of Virginia," was a delicious study--quite a little work of genius in
its way--though I must own her novel, "The Quick or the Dead," was a
mere boggle of wild sentiment and scarcely-repressed sensualism. Some
critics were very hard down upon her, because she threatened to be
"original" all the time, and critics hate that sort of thing. That
is why they invariably "go" for one of our newest inflictions, Marie
Corelli, of whom it may be truly said that she has written no two
books alike, either in plot or style; and the grave _Spectator_ on
one occasion forgot itself so far as to say that her romance entitled
"Ardath" had actually beaten Beckford's renowned "Vathek" out of the
field. But all the same, with every respect for the _Spectator's_
opinion, I, personally speaking, find her a distinctly exasperating
writer, who is neither here, there, nor anywhere--a "will-o'-the-wisp"
sort of being, of whom it is devoutly to be wished that she would
settle into a "groove," as she would be less of a trial to the (in her
case) always savage reviewer.

Nothing is more irritating to a critic than to have to chronicle
the reckless flights of this young woman's unbridled and fantastic
imagination. She tells us about heaven and hell as if she had been to
them both, and had rather enjoyed her experiences. Valiant attempts
to "quash" her have been made, but apparently in vain, and most of my
brethren in the critical faculty consider her a positive infliction.
Why does she not take the advice tendered her by the _World_, and other
sensible journals, and retire altogether from literature? I am sure she
would be much happier "picking geranium leaves" _à la_ Becky Sharp,
with a husband and two thousand a-year. As it is, her very name is, to
the men of the press, what a red rag is to a bull. They are down upon
it instantly with a fury that is almost laughable in its violence. But
I suppose she is like the rest of her sex--obstinate, and that she
will hold on her wild career, regardless of censure. Only, as I say, I
wish she would elect a "groove" to run in, for I, among many others,
shall be relieved as well as delighted when we are all quite certain
beyond a doubt as to what sort of book we are to expect from her. At
present she is a mere vexation to any well-ordered mind.

Poor Mrs. Henry Wood! What a wonderfully "groovy" woman _she_ was!
always writing, as one of my brother-critics has aptly remarked, "in
the style of an educated upper housemaid." And yet her books sell
largely--partly because Bentley and Son advertise them perpetually,
and partly because they "will not bring a blush to the cheek of the
Young Person." This latter reason accounts for the popularity (in the
pious provinces) of that astoundingly dull writer, Edna Lyall. Patience
almost fails me when I think of that lady's closely-printed, bulky
volumes, all about nothing. "Groove"? ye gods! I should think it _was_
a "groove"--a religious, goody-goody "groove," out of which there is
never the smallest possibility of an escape. But perhaps one of the
circumstances that surprises me most in the fate of all the mass of
fiction produced weekly, is the curious placidity with which the public
take it up, scan it, lay it aside, and forget it instantly. Scarce one
out of all the writers writing, male and female, has a book remembered
by Mudie's supporters after a year. If any novel is still thought of
and talked of after that period, you may be sure it is not "groovy,"
but that it runs in a directly contrary current to all "grooves" of
preconceived opinion--that it has something vaguely irritating about
it as well as pleasing--hence its success. But on the whole I am
not sure that I do not prefer "groovy" writers after all. There is
a comfortable certainty in their literary manœuvres. They are not
going to frighten you by exploding a big fiery bomb of Imagination or
Truth (both these things are abhorrent to me) on the reader unawares.
It is really quite a weird sensation to take up the latest book by
a writer who has the reputation of being able to tell you something
different each time, because, of course, you never know what he or she
may be at. You may have your very soul racked by painful or pathetic
surprises--and why should we have our souls racked? The persistently
"original" man may take us to the brink of a hell and force us to look
down when we would rather not; he may suddenly exert all his forces to
drag our leaden minds after him up to a heaven where we are not quite
ready to go. Then, again, he may give us descriptions of human passion
such as will make us grow quite hot and anon quite cold with the most
curious feelings; what have we done that we should be afflicted with
literary ague? No; it is better, it is safer, to have our novelists
all arranged in "grooves" or "sets" ready to hand, so that we shall
know exactly where to find the chroniclers of rural stories, sporting
stories, detective stories, ghost stories, every "male and female after
their kind," each in his or her own appointed place. To get a book by
an author who is recognised as a manufacturer of "racing novels," and
find him breaking out into a strain of sublimated philosophy, would be
indeed an alarming circumstance to most readers. Oh, yes, it is better
to be "groovy"; sometimes the public get tired and throw you over, but
that sort of thing happens more frequently in restless France and Italy
than in England. Had I been "groovy" I should have been famous--at
least, so I have been told by a lady skilled in the fashionable science
of palmistry. But being unable to play the mill-horse, and go round
and round in a recognised rut, here I am--the merest un-notorious
Nobody. What a pity! I cannot but heave an involuntary sigh over my
lost opportunities. If I had only had the necessary ambition, I could
have been made a "Celebrity at Home" for one of the leading journals.
"Fancy that!" to quote from the immortal Ibsen's "Hedda Gabler." And
then--proud thought!--I should have been a Somebody. Not because I
had achieved something--oh, no, that isn't required of a "Celebrity at
Home." Not at all. In fact, the less you do nowadays the more likely
you are to become a "celebrity" of the newspapers. So that as I have
done nothing, and moreover, as I have really nothing to do, I ought, by
all modern rule and plan, to be "interviewed" as--well, let me modestly
suggest, as a "Coming" person, perhaps? Lots of fellows are "Coming,"
according to the press, who never arrive. I could be advertised as one
of those, without doing much harm to anybody? Won't some one back me
up? I am fully aware of the extent of my loss in literature in having
failed to find a "groove"--but it's never too late to mend, and perhaps
I shall discover it still and settle down in it. At present I am not
anxious, because, as far as my observations on the great literary
raree-show have gone, I find the chief object of the modern Pen is to
earn Money, not Fame. Now, of money I have enough, and of fame--well! I
am a friend of Gladstone's, and that assures fame to anybody!

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Miss Hannah Lynch has published a "Commentary" on the works of
George Meredith.




X.

OF THE SOCIAL ELEPHANT.


Upon my word, the crowd is very dense just here! I find it more than
difficult to elbow a passage through. And I know how dangerous it is
to jostle literary men, even by accident--they are so touchy, that no
matter how politely you apologise for the inadvertency, they never
excuse it. And there is a little obstruction yonder in the person of
the tame Elephant, who is a sort of grotesque pet of ours; he moves
slowly on account of his bulk, and he has a big palanquin on his
back in which sits the Fairy who manages him. It's quite a charming
spectacle--especially the Fairy part of it--and although there is
such a crush in this particular corner, it is pleasant to see how
good-natured some of the people are, and how kindly they allow the
Elephant to get along in spite of increasing scarcity of room, and how
they all make light of his awkward size because he is such a nice,
mild, innocent, sagacious creature.

What am I talking about?--who am I talking about? Nothing!--nobody! I
am only making an allegory. It is not called "The Sunlight Lay Across
my Bed," but "The Elephant Walked Across my Path." So he did on one
occasion. I wasn't a bit inconvenienced by his proceedings; he thought
I was, but I wasn't.

When they are at home the Elephant and the Fairy live together. The
Elephant has a Trunk (or Intellectual Faculty) of the utmost delicacy
and sensitiveness at the tip, and with this exquisitely formed member
he is fond of picking up Pins. The Fairy watches him with a touch of
melancholy interest in her lovely eyes; pins are certainly useful,
and he does pick them up "beautifully." No one can be more bewitching
than the Fairy; no one can be blander or more aware of his own value
than the Elephant. Conscious of weight and ponderous movement, he
nevertheless manages to preserve a suggestion of something indefinable
that is "utter." He is not without malice--note the slyness of his
eye when he is at his graceful trick of Pin-lifting. He will, it is
true, wave his trunk to and fro with a majestic gentleness that seems
harmless, but a closer inspection of him will arouse in the timorous
observer a vague sense of danger. The chances are ten to one that he
will accept the sugared biscuit (or compliment) offered to him by the
unsuspecting beholder, and then that he will incontinently seize the
unsuspecting one suddenly round the body and dash him to bits on the
flat ground of some hard journalistic matter suitable for smashing
a man. But he never forgets himself so far as to trumpet forth this
secret capability of his; the only warning the visitor ever receives as
to his possible malicious intent is the solemn twinkle of his sly green
eye. Beware that eye! it means mischief.

As for the Fairy, it is not too much to say that she is one of the
prettiest things alive. She does not seem to stand at all in awe of
her Elephant lord. She has her own little webs to weave--silvery
webs of gossamer-discussion on politics, in which, bless her heart
for a charming little Radical, she works neither good nor harm. Her
eyes would burn a hole through many a stern old Tory's waistcoat and
make him dizzily doubtful as to what party he really belonged to for
the moment. She has the prettiest hair, all loosely curling about
her face, and she has a very low voice, so modulated as to seem to
some folks affected in its intonation. But it isn't affected; it
is a natural music, and only repulsive old spinsters with cracked
vocal cords presume to cast aspersions on its dulcet sweetness. She
dresses "æsthetically"--in all sorts of strange tints, and rich
stuffs, made in a fashion which the masculine mind must describe
as "gathered-up-anyhow"--with large and wondrous sleeves and queer
mediæval adornments--it pleases her whim so to do, and it also
pleases the Elephant, who is apt to get excited on the subject of
Colour. We all know what a red rag is to a bull--so we should not
be surprised to find an Elephant who is calmed by some colours and
enraged by others. Colour, in fact, is the only rule of life accepted
by the Elephant--better to have no morality, according to him, than
no sense of Colour. And so the Fairy robes herself in curious and
cunningly-devised hues to soothe the Elephant's nerves (Elephants
have thick hides but excessively fragile nerves, as every naturalist
will tell you); and pranks herself out like a flower of grace set
in a queen's garden. She does not talk much, this quaint Fairy, but
she looks whole histories. Her gaze is softly wistful, and often
abstracted; at certain moments her spirit seems to have gone out of her
on invisible wings, miles away from the Elephant and literary Castle,
and it is in such moments that she looks her very prettiest. To me
she is infinitely more interesting than the Elephant himself, but as
it is the Elephant whom everybody goes to see, I must try to do him
justice--if I can!

To begin with, I know him very well, and he knows me. I have fed him
many a time and oft with the sugared compliments he likes best--and
what is really a matter worth noting he has _allowed_ me to feed him.
This is very good of him. He is not so amiable to everybody. Few
indeed are permitted the high honour of holding out a dainty morsel of
flattery to that delicately-sniffing trunk which "smells a rat" too
swiftly to be easily cajoled. But it has pleased the Elephant to take
food from my hand, though while he ate, I noticed he never stopped
winking. So that I know perfectly well who it was that lifted me up
a while ago in a journal that shall be nameless, and did his utmost
to smash me utterly by the force with which he threw me down again.
Elephants have "nasty humours" now and then--it is their nature.
But for once this particular animal found his match. He didn't hurt
me though he tried; I got up from under his very feet, and--offered
him another Compliment. He took it--gracefully; swallowed it
"beautifully"--and does not wink quite so much now. Still, his eye is
always on me--and mine on him--and we begin to understand each other.

His prettiest trick, and the one for which he is chiefly admired, is,
as I said before, the delicate way in which he picks up Pins. Pins
that any less sensitive creature would think worthless, he instantly
perceives, selects and classes as "distinctly precious." Minute points
of discussion having to do with vague subjects which (unless we could
live on an Island of Dreams like the Laureate's Lotus-eaters) no one
has any time to waste in considering, he (the Elephant) turns over and
over and disposes of in his own peculiar fashion. He has a low estimate
of man's moral responsibilities, he thinks that if the "masses"
could only be brought to appreciate Colour as keenly as he himself
appreciates it, the world would be both happy and wise, and would have
no further need of law. He considers Nature _au naturel_ a mistake.
Nature must be refined by Art. _Ergo_, a grand waterfall would not
appeal to him, unless properly illumined by electricity, or otherwise
got up for effect. He himself is got up for effect--if he were not,
according to his own showing, he would be hideous. An Elephant of
the jungle is unlovely, but an Elephant in civilian attire, decently
housed, with a Fairy to look after him and preside over his meals, is a
very different animal. Art has refined him. Nature has nothing more to
do with him.

Sometimes the Elephant ruminates. Pins cease to interest him, and with
coiled-up trunk (_i.e._, Intellectual Faculty), and heavy limbs at
rest, he shuts his blinking emerald eyes to outer things, and thinks.
Then, rising with a mighty roar of trumpeting that blares across the
old world and the new, he tears up the ground beneath his feet, and
throws a Production--_i.e._, a novel, or a play--in the face of his
foes. And his foes momentarily shrink back from him, appalled at the
noise he makes; but anon they rise up boldly in their puny strength to
confront his ponderosity. Staves, darts, arrows and stones they get
together in haste and trembling, and, shielding themselves behind
different editor's desks, begin the wild affray. Lo, how the huge Trunk
sways and the green eyes glare! Trample the Production to pieces, ye
pigmy ruffians of reviewers, ye shall never crush what is "immortal!"
Howl, ye spitfires of the Press, ye shall never make the Elephant's
shadow diminish by one iota! For the fulminating truth of the
elephantine Production, from a literary point of view, is this: That
"as a work of art it is perfection, and perfection is what we artists
aim at."

Thus the Elephant, with much pounding of feet, swinging of trunk,
lashing of tail, and scattering of dust in the eyes of bewildered
beholders. And truly he succeeds in attracting an infinite amount of
attention, as why should he not? He is a lordly animal; large enough to
be seen at a distance, and society pets him as it pets all creatures of
whom it is vaguely afraid. Shy, retiring souls have no chance whatever
of what is called "social success" nowadays. You must either be an
Elephant or a Gnat; you must rend or sting before society will take
any notice of you. And though critics curse the Elephant and wish he
were well out of their way, Society fondles him; and as long as he
is thus fondled, so long will he score certain victories in art and
literature. It is impossible to "quash" him, he is too big. Every one
is bound to look at him, and when he begins to move, albeit slowly,
every one is equally bound to get out of the way.

There was once a time, however (when the Elephant was younger), in
which it seemed doubtful whether he would remain an Elephant. A
strange spell was upon him, a wizard-glow of the light that blinds
reviewers--Genius. He stood on the confines of a sort of magic
territory, wagging his delicate Trunk wistfully, and taking inquiring
sniffs at the world. He was then like one of those deeply interesting
animals we read about in the dear old fairy-books; he was waiting for
the proper person to come and cut off his head, or throw water over
him, or something, and say--"Quit thy present form and take that of
a ----" What? Well, let us say "Poet," for example. Yes, that would
have probably been the correct formula--"Quit thy present form and
take that of a Poet." And then, hey presto! he would have skipped out
of his hide, all dressed in dazzling blue and silver, a very Prince
of wit and wisdom. But the magician who could or might have worked
this change in him didn't turn up at the right moment, and so no one
would believe he was anything _but_ an Elephant at last. And when he
found that this was people's fixed opinion, and that nobody could be
persuaded to think otherwise, he showed a few very ugly humours. He
broke into the newspaper shops and went rampaging round among the pens
and the ink-pots. He knocked down a few unwary authors whom he imagined
stood in his way, and when they _were_ down, he stamped upon them.
This was not nice of him. But he ought to have known, if he had been
as wise as elephants are supposed to be, that authors, unless they
are very frail indeed, take a deal of killing before being killed.
And he might have foreseen the possibility of those trampled people
getting up and revenging themselves whenever they had the chance. His
"perfect" work was the very thing they had waited for ever so long.
And they did not spare the Elephant. Not they! They remembered the
weight of his feet on themselves, and not being able to tread on him
because he was so large and heavy and obstinate, they stuck things into
him instead. The "barbëd arrow," you know, that kind of disagreeable
small weapon that goes in deep and rankles. A whole shower of such
irritating little darts went into the Elephant--just in the delicate
fleshy places between the folds of his hide--and it was an amazing
sight to see how badly he took them. Never was such a roaring and
trumpeting heard before! In the unreasoning heat of rage he quite
forgot how matters really stood, and that he was only getting the _quid
pro quo_ he actually deserved. He never gave a thought to the authors
he had mangled and left for dead, and who had not been allowed to make
any outcry on the subject of their wounds. He had no recollection of
that Scriptural anecdote which tells how the "dry bones" came together
"bone by bone," and became a "great standing army." _His_ "dry bones"
were the poor poets and novelists he had stamped upon; indeed, not only
had he stamped upon them, but he had even filled his trunk with muddy
water, and squirted it over their seemingly lifeless remains. But the
"great army" was there, and not past fighting, and it marched straight
at and around the Elephant. On one occasion it encamped a force against
him in the _St. James's Gazette_, and alas, for the good Elephant's
vanity, he imagined he had foes there simply because he holds Radical
views. Ye gods! Who that is commonly sane, cares whether an elephant be
Radical, Whig, or Tory? Politics are the very last subject in the world
I should consult an Elephant about. The mere idea of such a thing is
enough to make a certain _St. James's Gazette_ reviewer I wot of, split
his sides with laughter in the evil secrecy of his literary den.

As I hinted before, the Elephant while on the rampage in the
newspaper-shops once chanced on my humble self, sitting back in an
unobtrusive corner. One would have thought that to a lordly animal of
such a size, I might have seemed too microscopic to be noticed, but
not a bit of it. He "went" for me, with a good deal of unnecessary
vigour--a total waste of power on his part, I considered; however,
that was his look-out, not mine. He didn't know who I was then, and
he doesn't quite know now, though I believe if I threw off my domino
and showed him my features he would take to his old tricks again in
a minute. But I don't want to irritate him, because he is really a
good creature; I would much rather pet him than goad him. He can be
cruel, but he can also be kind, and it is in the latter mood that
everybody likes him and wants to give him sugar-candy. Moreover, as
Elephant he is the living Emblem of Wisdom--a sacred being; and, if one
is of an Eastern turn of mind, worthy of worship--and I never heard
of any one yet who would venture to cast a doubt on his sagacity.
He is wonderfully knowing; his opinion on some things is always
worth having, and when he picks up Pins his movements are graceful
and always worth watching. Moreover, one never gets tired of looking
at the lovely Fairy who guards and guides him. We could not spare
either of the twain from our midst--they form a picture "full of
Colour." When we view that picture the "moral sense" of Colour enters
into us--we feel twice born and twice alive. See how graceful is the
_cortége_! how quaint and pretty and Oriental! Through the eye-holes
of my domino I gaze admiringly upon the group--it makes a bright
reflection on the "tablets of my memory." Move on, gentle Elephant!
Move on! As slowly as you like, and at your own pleasure. Only don't
try to "smash" me any more--it's useless. I am formed of that hard
"virile" composition of literary ware "guaranteed unsmashable"--I am
neither glass nor porcelain. Have another biscuit? Another _bon-bon_
of sugared praise? Well, then, you are a poet in disguise--a genius,
wrapped up and sealed down under a hopeless weight of circumstances.
I know your buried qualities well, and had some brave person cut off
your head--_i.e._ your Self-Esteem (as I previously suggested)--years
ago, we might have had a Prince, nay, even a King, among us. Yet on the
whole I think you are happy in your condition. The _dolce far niente_
suits you very well, and the bovine repose of an almost Buddhistic
meditation entirely agrees with your constitution, while as long as
life lasts you may be sure you shall never lack Pins. Pass, good
Elephant! I salute you profoundly, and with a still more profound
reverence I kiss the hands of the Fairy!




XI.

THE STORY OF A SOUTH AFRICAN DREAM.


Elephants and Fairies suggest the "Arabian Nights." The "Arabian
Nights" suggest, in their turn, the East, and the East suggests--ah!
what does the East not suggest? A. P. Sinnett with his eyeglass?
a vision of "Koot-Hoomi?" pretty Mrs. Besant, once atheist, now
theosophist? or the marvellous fat (now dematerialised) of the
marvellous Blavatsky? More, far more than these things! The very idea
of the East causes me to stand still where I am, in a corner among
all the literary folk, and "dream." The mood grows upon me; I am in
the humour for "dreams." I feel metaphysical; don't listen to me;
the fit will pass by and by. Nay, it _is_ passing, and I feel pious
instead--very pious; and I shall probably get blasphemous directly.
From piety to blasphemy is but a step; from the prayer of Moses to his
professing to see the Deity's "back parts" was but the hair's-breadth
of a line in Holy Writ. And as I find everything in a very bad state,
and as I think everybody wants reforming, I am going to tell a little
story. It is a beautiful little story, and if you ask the _Athenæum_
about it, it will tell you that it is "like a picture by Watts"; that
"it has had no forerunners in literature and probably will have no
successors." So you must pay great attention to it, and you must think
it over for a long time. It requires thinking over for a long time,
because it is a Parable. The best people, and especially those who want
to "tickle the ears" of the _Pall Mall_ groundlings, are all going to
talk and live and write in Parables for the future. So listen!


         "There was once a woman in South Africa.
     She saw the sunlight lie across her bed.
         When there is a window and no blind to it, the sunlight has a
           way of pouring in,
     And of falling in the direction which is most natural to itself.

            *       *       *       *       *

         The sunlight did not move,
     So the woman covered her eyes.
         And sleep came upon the woman and she dreamed.

            *       *       *       *       *

         Now in her dream the woman saw a hole.
     It was a round hole, and it was red inside and very deep
         And the woman looked down at the hole and said--'What hole is
           this?'
     And a loud voice answered her, saying--
         'That hole is Hell!'
     And the woman looked up, and, lo! there was God laughing at her.

            *       *       *       *       *

     And the woman looked down again at the hole, and saw how red it was
       and how very deep.
         And she knelt down, with both arms leaning on the brink of the
           hole.
     And she said to God: 'I like this place.'
     And God answered: 'Ay, dost thou so?'
               And God laughed again.
     And the woman said again: 'I like this place. It seems warm.'
         And God said: 'Ay, it _is_ warm.'
     And the woman said: 'I think I will go in thither.'
         And God said: 'Ay, go by all means!'
             And the woman went.

            *       *       *       *       *

     The hole was very wide and red and deep.
         And the woman had plenty of space to slide down.
     She slid; and the hole got wider and redder and deeper, but still
       she slid on.
     And presently she caught a creature by the hair.
         And she said to the creature: 'Who art thou?'
         And the creature answered: 'I am X. Y. Z. of the _Athenæum_,
           Bream's Buildings, Chancery Lane.
     And the woman said: 'Good, I like thee. Give me thy hand, and we
       will go together.'
         And the creature went with the woman.

            *       *       *       *       *

     The hole grew deeper, and it began to be more hot than warm.
     And further on the woman saw another creature saying mock prayers.
     And the woman asked: 'To whom dost thou say mock prayers?'
         And the creature said: 'To God up there. I want him not to
           laugh at me.'
         Then the woman said: 'Who art thou that God should laugh?'
     And the creature writhed, and answered: 'I am the religious Spirit
       of the _Pall Mall_, abiding in the street called Northumberland,
         off Strand.'
         And the woman said again: 'And doth God laugh at thee?'
     And the creature answered: 'Ay, he laugheth sore.'
         And the woman said: 'Nay, he shall not laugh. I will tell him
           to protect thee. Come with me.'
     And the creature ceased praying mock prayers, and followed the
       woman.

            *       *       *       *       *

     And presently the woman from South Africa grew weary.
         She desired to get out of the hole.
     And she called aloud to God: 'I wish to leave Hell.'
         And God said: 'Leave it then.'
               And she left it.

            *       *       *       *       *

       Outside the sun was shining.
     There was no hole anywhere to be seen.
         And the woman looked up, and lo! there was God laughing at her.
         Then said the woman: 'There is no hole.'
         And God gaily answered, 'No.'
     Then the woman asked: 'Where is Hell?'
         And God, very much amused, replied: 'I haven't the least idea!'
     And the woman smiled right joyously, and said: 'I have had bad
       Dreams.'
         And God said: 'You have!'

            *       *       *       *       *

     The sunlight lay across the bed of the woman from South Africa.
     She woke, and thought of the deep red hole she had seen.
     And she reflected on her strange meeting with X. Y. Z. of the
       _Athenæum_, and the 'Religious Spirit' of the _Pall Mall_.
     And she also thought what a playful and hilarious personage God
       was.
     Then she remembered she had had late supper the previous evening.
     Which accounted for 'Dreams.'

            *       *       *       *       *

     The sunlight still lies now and then across the bed of the woman
       from South Africa.
         It is a way the sunlight has.
     And God laughs, as well He may."


Now I hope everybody sees what a "touching simplicity" there is, what
a child-like familiarity with the Deity pervades the whole of this
"prose poem." And yet there is a "subtlety," a candour, a strange
melancholy, a curious cynicism, and a weirdness of conception and
strong picturesqueness about its every line. It is unique in itself; it
wants no explanation, because it says everything in the fewest words.
It has a diction as innocent and unadorned as that of an infant's
first spelling-book. And all the best critics I know want authors
to let "brevity be the soul of wit," and to tell their stories as
concisely as possible. If I were a novel-maker and wished to please
the critics, I should write my "thrillers" in telegram form; twelve or
twenty-four words to a chapter. Then I am sure I should get very well
reviewed. Critics have no time to read any thoroughly finished and
careful work--they seldom can do more than scan the first page and the
last. I know this, being a Critic myself, and I think it is a thousand
pities authors should take any trouble to write a middle part to their
stories. An Ollendorf curtness of wording is always desirable, unless,
indeed, one happens to be a George Meredith, and can manage to get
cleverly involved in a long sentence which takes time to decipher, and
when deciphered has literally no meaning at all. Then of course one is
a genius at once; but such masterly art is rare. And so on the whole I
like the "allegory" style best, because it is both brief and obscure
at the same time. It has the surface appearance of simplicity, but its
depth--ah! it is surprising to what a depth you can go in an allegory.
You can fall down a regular well of thought and go fast asleep at
the bottom, and when you wake up you wonder what it was all about,
and you have to begin that allegory over again. That is what I call
"reading"--hard reading--sensible reading. I like a thing you can never
make head or tail of--the brain fattens on such provender. I am going
to write out several dozen "Dreams" by and by--some of the queer ones I
have had after a bout of champagne, for example--and I shall give them
_gratis_ to the _Pall Mall_ with my fondest blessing. If there is "one
bright particular star" in the sphere of journalism I worship more than
another it is the _Pall Mall_, and I feel I can never do too much for
it. And it likes "dreams" and little innocent religious allegories,
because it is so good itself, and, like the boy Washington, has "never
told a lie." I have always considered that the _Pall Mall_ and the
German Kaiser are the only two earthly institutions "God" can favour,
seeing that, according to the lady from South Africa, He has taken
to "laughing" at most things. It is a pleasant picture, that of God
laughing--one, too, not to be found in all the Bible. There the Deity
has been represented as angry, jealous, reproachful, or benignant, but
it has been left to South African literary skill to show us how He
"laughed." And as the _Pall Mall_ thinks it all right that He _should_
laugh, why then we ought to coincide unanimously in the _Pall Mall's_
opinion. Because just imagine what London would be without the _Pall
Mall_! Can mind conceive a more hideous desert?--a more wildly howling
desolation? We should be left friendless and all unguided without our
angel of reform; our clean, white-winged, heavenly, truthful Apostle
of Northumberland Street, who is always able to tell us what is good
and what is bad; who can inform us all, statesmen, clerics, authors,
artists, and day-labourers, exactly what we ought and what we ought
not to do. In the event of another Deluge (and some of the scientists
assure us we shall have it soon) I know of a way in which some few of
us might be saved; that is, some few with whom "God" is delighted,
such as myself and the German Kaiser. We should simply require to make
friends with the _Pall Mall_ staff, (several of the members are ladies,
and how charming to have their society!), and build an ark out of
planks from the _Pall Mall_ office floors. We should then paste it all
over with _Pall Mall_ placards of the latest accounts of the Flood up
to date of sailing, for the fishes to read, and then we should get into
it; we who were the elected ones (including the Kaiser of course), and
off we would go in smiling safety, secure from winds and waves, being
the only "just people" left on a corrupted earth. And if in the end we
found another Mount Ararat, and it were left to the governing body,
_i.e._, the _Pall Mall_ staff and the German Kaiser, to begin a new
world ... O ye gods and little fishes! What a world it would be!




XII.

QUESTIONETH CONCERNING THE SLOUGH OF DESPOND.


Standing still too long is rather monotonous work. How Socrates could
have managed to remain a whole night on his feet in meditation is one
of those strange historical circumstances that have always puzzled me.
Now here have I been only a few minutes at rest; only dreaming one
little "dream" of how I, together with the Kaiser and the _Pall Mall_,
am going to set to work in the general renovation and improvement of
mankind, and yet I am as tired and bored and disposed to yawn as any
of the gaping people in the crowd who have stopped a second to listen
to me. Let me pass on, good folk!--I will e'en resume my indolent,
aimless way, for truly there are many things to be seen both wise and
wonderful, which even a strolling player would not miss. Only I will,
with everybody's good leave, avoid that black and stagnant quagmire
of literary matter that stretches its unseemly length across the
social arena. 'Tis a veritable mud-trap, a dismal Slough of Despond,
into which I once fell heedlessly, all through the force of example.
I saw others (some of whom I respected) making for the Slough, and I
followed. When my friends ran to it straight and tumbled in, I did
likewise, and wallowed in the mud with those who were near and dear
to me. I stayed there heroically till I was nearly suffocated, then,
unable to bear it any longer, I made a strong effort and scrambled out,
melancholy and depressed, but--free. Free, and wise enough not to be
cajoled into those black depths again. You see I have not yet shaken
off my allegorical humour, and I am just now speaking allegorically.
For the benefit of those who are slow to perceive the "subtle" meaning
of an allegory I do not mind condescending to explain that by the
Slough of Despond I mean the great, sticky, woful, heterogeneous
mass of Magazine Literature. What is the use of it? Why is it with
us? Who wants such productions as the magazines of England, when the
magazines of America can be had? Americans know how to make their
magazines interesting; Englishmen do not. I beg some one who is well
instructed in these matters to tell me where I can find the abnormal
beings who derive any real intellectual benefit from the ponderous
pages of the _Nineteenth Century_, for example? Little Knowles sits in
his editorial chair even as an angler sits by a stream, assiduously
fishing for names and nothing more. He allows Gladstone to write
the purest nonsense about "Dante at Oxford," simply because he _is_
Gladstone. He takes poorly-written articles on public questions from
lords and dukes simply because they _are_ lords and dukes. Genius
weighs as nothing with him--titles and passing notorieties that "draw"
are everything. Then we have the _Contemporary_, the _Fortnightly_, the
_New Review_, the _Quarterly_, all on the same "deadly lively" level.
The _Quarterly_ still boasts of its bygone villainous attack on Keats,
for not so very long ago it said that it considered that in-"famous"
criticism perfectly justifiable. Satisfied with itself in this regard,
it praises Hall Caine! O gods of Olympus! There is also the venerable
_Blackwood_, of whose mild chimney-corner prattle it were cruel to
take serious observation. And there is _Temple Bar_, _The Argosy_,
_London Society_, _Belgravia_, and hosts of mild imitations of these;
yet taken altogether the magazines published in London do not give in
their entirety half as much satisfaction or well-written information
to the reader as the American _Century_ magazine, or _Harper's_. This
fact helps to emphasize the general "behindhand" tendency of literary
things in Great Britain, as compared to those same things in America.
Even the children's magazines in the "States" are interesting, and
full of concise, simple, pleasantly-worded knowledge, but here, if
you want pure, undiluted literary drivel, buy a child's magazine.
However, it must be remembered that Americans generally, young and
old, like to acquire information; perhaps they feel they do not yet
know everything. The English, on the contrary, have a rooted aversion
to being instructed, inasmuch as every true-born Britisher considers
himself about equal to the Deity in omniscience.

Most of us, I suppose, have heard of Charles Dickens and his immortal
novels, the most wholesome, humane, sympathetic, and heart-invigorating
books that ever, by happy fortune, were given to the public. And I
daresay we remember in "Little Dorrit" the lively young man connected
with the "Circumlocution Office," who very strenuously objected to the
existence of people who "wanted to know, you know." Now I am one of
those people. I want to know, you know, why we should have about us
all these little marshy literary mud-pools which make up the British
magazine Slough of Despond. I want those curiously-minded beings who
read (and buy) the magazines, and follow all the dreadful "serials"
therein, to "stand forth and deliver." I want to know, you know,
how they manage to do it? Whether they feel good after it? Whether
they ever read anything else? And what opinions they have formed on
literature by this means? Whether they accept the verse in _Temple
Bar_, for example, as actual poetry? Or the short stories and articles
as samples of good terse English style? Whether they find their
brains developing under the fine humour of _Belgravia_? Whether their
intellectual faculties are roused by a study of _The Strand Magazine_
(which began well, but is now as monotonous as the rest) or _The
English Illustrated_? I want to know, you know. Who laugheth at _The
Idler_? Who rejoiceth in _Macmillan's_? And who on God's good earth
can stand _The Novel Review_? What happy saints peruse _The Leisure
Hour_?--what angels sit down to con the pages of _Cassell's Family
Magazine_? Who bothereth himself with _The Bookman_? Who conceiveth
it agreeable to read _Longman's_ or _The Gentleman's Magazine_?
There must be people who do these things; and, certainly, by a wild
stretch of imagination, I can picture a fat mamma glancing casually at
_Belgravia_, the while she watches her eldest girl's flirtation with
a "moneyed" suitor out of the corner of her eye; I can also deem it
possible that a paunchy paterfamilias might cut the pages of _Temple
Bar_ and hand it in as a delicate attention to his children's governess
in the schoolroom. But further than this I cannot go. It may be that
the magazines exist for the domestic circle only--the English domestic
circle, of course. For other countries' domestic circles they would not
serve. I think all those interesting females who are understood to be
"good mothers," ladies with high maternal foreheads and small chins,
very likely read the magazines. They do not want to study, they do
not want to learn, they never require to read anything but the tamest
stuff, just to pass away an hour between lunch and afternoon-tea. These
are the only individuals I can connect with magazine literature. But,
of course, I may be wrong. There may be intellectual persons who accept
the varied utterances of the _Nineteenth Century_ and _Fortnightly_ as
gospel. I can understand any one liking the _Review of Reviews_. That
serves a purpose, and is admirably done. Apart from its adoration of
the _Pall Mall Gazette_, it is really an excellently managed concern.
That and the _Century_ suffice me--the American _Century_ I mean, not
the Nineteenth Century, which will hardly enter the Twentieth. Quite
recently, one Edward Delille severely slated the American press and
American literature generally, with the hysterical passion of those
lady-writers who, to use reviewer's parlance, "let down their back hair
and scream." Rather unkind of Edward, considering that rumour asserts
him to be American himself. A man should stick up for his own country
or get re-nationalised. Does Delille find English magazine literature
superior to that of America? If he does, he deserves his fate! Let him
wallow, as I did, in the Slough of Despond, till he groweth weary, and
when he crieth, "Help! release me!" let no one answer. For the Slough
is the ruin of all originally-minded men; and any novelist who writes
magazine serials is simply committing literary suicide. His name grows
stale to the public ear, his stories lose point, his style lacks proper
warmth, and his very thoughts grow crippled. In a work of true art the
creator should be free as air and answerable to none, not even to that
Olympian god, a magazine editor.

But because I now avoid the Slough of Despond I do not want others
to avoid it. On the contrary, I love to see a certain class of folk
stuck in the mud. I feel they could not be in a better plight, and
I enjoy the spectacle. Moreover, "by their magazines ye shall know
them." Their conversation, their ideas, their opinions, all are
taken out of the magazines. This is beautiful and edifying. The lady
who talks _Temple Bar_ has naturally a calmer view of life than the
gentleman who talks _Nineteenth Century_. The sweet thing who murmurs
_Chambers's Journal_ is not so worldly-wise as her friend who utters
_New Review_. The man at the club who converses _Quarterly_ may or may
not agree with him who pronounceth _Contemporary_. And so on. It is
like the Baths of Leuk, where every mud-bather has, if he likes, his
own private floating-table, with writing materials and cup of coffee.
But the mud is everywhere all the same, and every man is stuck in it
like a sort of civilised tadpole. And what is always a mystery to me
is how so many magazines manage to "pay." For of course they must pay,
or else they would not be kept going. However, there are various such
social mysteries, which not even the most astute person can fathom.
And I am not astute. I simply "notice" things. As for attempting to
take any sort of correct measure of the fancies and "fads" of the
British Public, that is impossible. Such humours are more "occult"
than theosophy itself. Frenchmen cannot understand "Madame Grundée."
Neither can I. She is always an incomprehensible old lady at the best
of times, but when she takes to reading all the magazines and liking
the literature therein contained, she becomes a spectacled Sphinx,
the riddle of whose social existence is not worth the solving. And in
its bovine tolerance of such an excess of stupid ephemeral literary
matter Great Britain proves for the millionth time how _un_-literary
and inartistic it is as a nation. But I am not going to be angry about
it. I always laugh at these things. They do not affect me personally,
as I am out of them. And I must never forget that I have reason to be
grateful to at least one magazine out of the mass--_The Fortnightly_.
It was lent to me by a friend as a cure for insomnia. It succeeded
perfectly. Three pages of a long political article sufficed; a gentle
drowsiness stole over me, a misty vagueness possessed my brain, and
I, who had been restless for many nights, now under the somnolent
spell of excellent Frank Harris, slept the sleep of the just. Others
have derived the same benefit by the same means, so I am told,
wherefore Harris is a benefactor to his kind. His magazine is the
one little oasis in the Slough where tired folks may find rest, if
not refreshment, and people who want a peaceful nap should go there
straight. As for me, I am out of the Slough altogether--I merely stand
near the brink and look on. And my observations are addressed to
nobody. I soliloquise for my own pleasure, like Hamlet, and, with that
psychological Dane, may assure everybody who is concerned about me that
"I am only mad nor-nor-east; when the wind blows southerly I know a
hawk from a heron-shaw."




XIII.

DESCRIBETH THE PIOUS PUBLISHER.


The pious publisher is a man who always says "God bless you!" to the
author he is cheating. "God bless you!" is easily said, sounds well,
and costs nothing, all of which is important. The more "profit" the
pious publisher can make out of the individual he blesses, the more
fervent is his benediction. Now, it is not pleasant to have to mistrust
a blessing, and yet, out of the vague interest I have always taken
in all human imps born of the ink-pot, I would advise them not to
bow with too much childlike humility and confidence to the blessing
of the pious publisher. If it is a particularly earnest and friendly
benediction,--well! it might be advisable to see how "royalties"
are getting on. The pious publisher does not bless you for nothing,
depend upon it. You are not his relative; he has no cause to love you
or ask the Almighty to look after you, unless he is making a "good
thing" out of you, in which case he is grateful, after a peculiar
manner of his own. Perhaps he feels he can order a few dozen extra
old brands of port; perhaps, too, he will find it possible to have
a certain improvement carried out in his dwelling which he has long
meditated, all through you--you, a successful author whose books have
had an extra large sale unknown to yourself. And, naturally, he looks
at you with a moist and kindly eye; his heart swells paternally, and
the blessing rises to his lips almost involuntarily. He surveys with
gentle complacency the modest arrangements of your house--the tact
by which worn-out furniture is concealed by "art" antimacassars,
the efforts to "make both ends meet" which are proudly visible in
every room, and he grows blander and blander. He admires the "art"
coverings--he admires the furniture--he admires everything. He does
not mind lunching with you--oh, not at all. And while at luncheon he
advises you, patronisingly, sagely, as to how you should write your
next book. You have your own ideas--yes, yes, that is right, that is
very good! it is proper for you to have your own ideas, but it is
also advisable for you to bring those ideas into keeping with the
ordinary public taste. Ordinary, mark you! not extraordinary. There
are certain subjects you should try to avoid, as being unpleasing to
the mind of the respectable middle classes. For example, new notions
with regard to religion are dangerous! yes, yes, dangerous and doubtful
too--doubtful as regards a "sale." Then, bigamy is not a pleasant
subject. It would cause eruptions to break out on the cheek of the
Young Person, and it would not secure any chance as a "gift-book."
Then, a murder is a painful thing!--exceedingly painful--you must
leave out murder. And, for Heaven's sake, do not enter into any
question of suicide--it is a morbid taste, and a book dealing with it
in any powerful or striking manner would be quite tabooed from the
middle-class family circle, especially in the provinces. A forgery
might be introduced, if the forger turned out to be a manly hero in the
end and properly repentant--and a little (the pious publisher would say
"a leetle") illicit love would not be objectionable--in fact, it might
be made highly saleable if a curate and a housemaid were the guilty
parties, and there were a child born who turned out to be the heir to
five millions, and the erring curate set things right in the usual
thirty-one-and-sixpenny way. But nothing should be drawn too strong;
you understand? no luscious colouring of any sort--keep the imagination
well in check--tint the canvas grey--and make the book one that will be
bought by stout, moral-minded parents, for slim, no-minded young women,
and it is sure of a sale--sure! And thus the pious publisher pleasantly
adviseth, the while the heart of the listening author sinks lower
and lower, and his soul sickens, gasping for the strong, broad eagle
freedom of flight, which while he works for a pious publisher never
will be his.

It is a curious fact, but the pious publisher apparently possesses a
very naïve, innocent, and undefiled nature. He does not know the world
at all, or if he does, he has no idea of its wickedness. When he is
told of some dreadful social scandal he does not believe it--dear, dear
no! he cannot believe it. He is a round, paunchy man, is the pious
publisher, bald-headed, clean-shaven, with an eminently respectable
expression of countenance, and an ostentatious assertion of honesty in
the very set of his clothes. He has a soft voice and a conciliating
smile, and he gets on best with women authors. He tells them first how
well they are looking--his next step is to call them "my dear." They
are frequently much touched by this, and in the yielding softness of
their hearts, forget to nail him down to "terms." Even the fiercest,
ugliest "blue-stocking" that ever lived is conscious of a nervous quiver
through the iron fibres of her soul, when the fat, unctuous, kindly,
pious publisher, unawed by her stem features, says "My dear." There is
a delicate something in his tone which pleasantly persuades her that,
after all, it is possible she may be good-looking. Unconsciously she
relaxes in severity, and he drives his bargain home with such sweet
firmness as to entirely succeed in having his own way--a way which,
whether it lead to advantage or loss, she, poor "blue," is generally
too weak to dispute. "My dear" is a phrase that will not work on the
minds of men authors of course, so the pious publisher, when he has
to do with the "virile" sex, substitutes "My boy!" and accompanies
this epithet with a hearty, encouraging clap on the shoulder. When
the author in question is too old and frail (as well as too reduced
to misery by the machinations of pious publishers) to be impressed by
this jovial "My boy!" the pious publisher is not at a loss. No! He then
says "My dear fellow," in gentle, serious, sympathetic accents. This
frequently produces a good effect. It is indeed remarkable what an
impression these meaningless, apparently kindly, short phrases have on
the weary minds of authors when uttered by the pious publisher. It is
ridiculous in a way, but pitiful too. No consciousness of intellectual
supremacy will ever eradicate from the human heart the craving for
human sympathy, and the biggest author that ever wielded potent pen has
no proof-armour against the simple magic of a kindly word. And tired
out with long thinking and labour, it may be that sometimes the pious
publisher's "dear fellow" hits a sensitive little place in the author's
complex mechanism, somewhere about where the tears are (if any author
is permitted to have tears), and he becomes dimly soothed by the simple
phrase, so soothed as to actually fancy he has found--a friend! And in
the little "arrangement" made for his work the pious publisher scores
again--heavily, as usual.

Needless to say the pious publisher is an exceedingly shrewd business
man. His piety distinctly "pays." His "God bless you!" has saved him
many an extra twenty or fifty pounds; his "my dear" and "dear fellow"
have helped to make suspicious novelists accept without a murmur his
statements of their royalties. He knows all this perfectly well. He
reads all the poor, pitiful, yet beautiful human weakness of men and
women thoroughly, and makes his capital out of it while he can. God,
we are told, compassionates human weakness; the pious publisher lives
by it. He uses the sad little vanities of the would-be "genius" as so
many channels of speculation. He has an agreeable way of reminding the
very small writer of the gloriously self-denying manner in which the
very great writers managed to exist--those writers of old historic time
who served Art for Art's sake, and were content to live upon a crust
of bread for the sake of future glory. That noble Crust! The pious
publisher wishes all authors would live upon it. "My dear boy," he
says, "it is the modern thirst of gold that kills Art. Now you are a
true 'artist.'" (Here probably the small writer thus addressed cannot
restrain a nervous wriggle of satisfaction.) "Yes, yes! a true artist!
I can see that at a glance. To you money weighs as nothing compared
with high ambition and attainment." (The small writer is perhaps not
quite sure about this, still he is unable to look stern, so he smiles
feebly.) "To grind out literature for the mere sake of accumulating
cash would be distasteful to a man of your lofty spirit. You were made
for better things. The notorieties of the day who allow themselves to
be paragraphed and 'boomed' and all the rest of it, and command for the
moment large sales, are really mere ephemera. Now, my dear boy, let
me advise you not to hamper your evident genius by over-anxiety about
money. Do your work, the great work that is in you to do; and if the
rewards come slowly, never mind! in your old age you will look back
to these days of effort as the sweetest of your life! Yes!" and the
pious publisher's eyes moisten at his own eloquence, "in the sunset of
your career, when you have made an assured name, and, let us hope, an
assured fortune also, you will remember this time of grand struggle
and endeavour! God bless you!"

The benediction is here uttered abruptly, as if the pious publisher
couldn't help it. It bursts from his manly bosom like a bomb-shell.
His pent-up emotion finds vent in it; his swelling liberality of
disposition is relieved by it. Meanwhile, the small author sits silent,
curiously disconcerted, and uncomfortably conscious that his face wears
a somewhat foolish expression. He doesn't want to look foolish, but
he knows he does. He is aware that the pious publisher has flattered
him, but somehow he does not like to admit that the flattery is more
than kindly and judicious praise. But, all the same, he ponders in a
dismal sort of way on those phrases "in your old age" and "the sunset
of your career." What! Is he, then, not to experience any of the joys
or luxuries of life till he is such a doddering old idiot as to be
only fit to jabber "reminiscences"? Is he to have no rest or physical
comfort in existence till his strength fails and his mental faculties
decay? Is his fortune only to be "assured" at a time when his chief
needs are a bed, an armchair, and a basin of gruel or "infant's food"?
The pious publisher implies as much. It is strange, and perhaps
wickedly ungrateful of the poor small author, but he does not care
about the "sunset" prospect in the least. He would rather be happy and
well fed while it is full day. And for the life of him he cannot help
thinking how very excellently the pious publisher himself is housed.
Pictures, books, statuary, horses--even a yacht--all these things have
come to the pious publisher long before "sunset." And yet what can he,
the poor small author, do? Nothing. He must consider himself lucky if
he gets his work accepted on any terms. He can't afford to be his own
publisher (not because of the expenses incurred in actually printing
and binding, for these are slight), but because he would be considered
an intruder and would have all the "publishers' rings" against him; and
not only the publishers' rings, but the Circulating Library Ring and
the Bookstall Ring; for England is a "free" country, and as a first
consequence of its glorious liberty, every one that does honest work
and seeks honest pay for the same, is the veriest slave that ever wore
chains and manacles.

There are many publishers, of course, who are not pious, and these
are generally among the most honest of their class. They do not
pretend to be anything but tradesmen, with an eye to business, and no
taste whatever for literature _as_ literature. They would as soon be
cheesemongers if the book-trade failed. They affect nothing; they are
brusque, commonplace men, and they often play a losing game by their
lack of proper urbanity. The pious publisher never loses a farthing.
He is always lining and re-lining his nest. He issues a larger number
of works by women than by men, for the reason that women are more
unbusinesslike than their lords, and more easily persuaded to accept
starvation prices. It may be said, and rightly, that women's work is
not frequently worth much, but there are, at the present time, two or
three women in literature whose success is indubitable and whose names
alone are of market value. These are they whom the pious publisher
loves to secure. The more gifted they are, the more unpractical; the
more engrossed in imaginative conception, the more unconscious of
treachery. They perhaps feel the pious publisher is even as a father
to them. He is invariably kind and courteous, and is always able
to "explain" troublesome things with the involved eloquence of a
Gladstone. Indeed, it can never be said that either to man or woman at
any time has the pious publisher been dictatorial or unfriendly. He
is too bland, too conscious of rectitude, too innocent of the world's
evil to be capable of anything but the truest Christian behaviour. If
a long-suffering author were to quarrel with him, he would only mildly
"regret the rupture of friendly terms," while quietly letting all his
particular "ring" know of the "rupture," and warning them against
having to do with the quarrelsome author in question; for the pious
publisher has no scruple in "boycotting" an author who deserts him for
a rival house. He can do so if he likes, and he frequently does like.
Did you not know this before, O ye unworldly, simple-minded Pensters?
Then know it now on the faith of a wandering truth-teller, and beware
of getting twisted in the pious publisher's silken coils. Stand firm
without yielding under his friendly shoulder-blow; turn his terms of
endearment into terms of ready cash, and if you succeed in making a
good bargain you may be sure he will _not_ say, "God bless you!" He
will probably sigh and tell you he is a poor man. This is a promising
sign for you, and you can bless _him_ if you like. But, unless you are
willing to be "done," never under any circumstances allow him to bless
_you_. Most casual benedictions are of doubtful value, but the blessing
of the pious publisher is, financially speaking, an author's damnation.
Beware it therefore; go on unblessed, and prosper!




XIV.

OF CERTAIN GREAT POETS.


Stop, stop, my dear Lord Tennyson! Whither away so fast? Why turn
your back churlishly upon me?--why spoil dignity by hastening your
steps?--why hide that venerable and honoured head in a hermit's cowl
of distrust for all human kind? I am not the "ubiquitous interviewer";
I do not want a lock of your hair or your autograph, for the autograph
I have in your own letters, and certainly you cannot spare any hair
just now. Fear me not, then, O great but crusty Poet; my silver domino
conceals the features of a friend; I will do no more than render you
distant but most absolute homage. I would not pry into your garden
solitudes at Haslemere--no, not for the '_World_.' I would not
force my way into your little kingdom at Freshwater for anything an
enterprising editor might offer me; for I love you as all England
loves you, and the utmost I can wish is that you would be friends with
both me and England. What have we done to you, my dear Lord--peer of
the realm and Peer of Poets--that you should disdain us, every one,
and take so much precaution to avoid our company? Have we not, as it
were, fallen at your feet in worship?--marked you out in our hearts and
histories as the greatest poet of the Victorian Era, and taken pride
in the splendour of your fame? Despise us not, noble Singer of sweet
idylls, for remember we have never despised _you_. In our troubles and
losses we have dropped soft tears over "In Memoriam"; in our loves
and hopes we have wandered among the woods and fields, singing in
thought the songs of "Maud" and "The Princess"; in our dreamy moods we
have pored over "The Lotus-Eaters," "The Palace of Art," "Tithonus,"
or "Ænone"; in our passionate moments we have felt all the scorn
and burning sorrow pent up in "Locksley Hall." You are the divine
melodist who has set our deep-hidden English romance and sentiment
to most tenderly expressed music; we are grateful, and we have shown
our gratitude. We have given you such fond hearing as few poets ever
win; we have lodged you in fair domains, and guarded you as a precious
jewel of the realm. What can we do more to satisfy you? Is there any
grander guerdon for a poet's labour than the whole English-speaking
people's honour? And that you have; and yet you manifest a soured
discontent that sadly misfits your calling. What is it all about? You
do not want to be looked at--"stared at" is your own way of expressing
it--you do not wish to be spoken to--you desire to ignore those who
most reverence you, and you treat with ill-mannered, "touch-me-not"
disdain the very people whose faithful admiration gives you all the
good things of this life which you enjoy. Oh, petulant Poet-peer! Do
no memories of the great dead bards (greater in genius than yourself,
but less fortunate in their reward) sometimes flit like ghosts across
the horizon of your dreams? Of Chatterton, self-slain through biting
poverty; of Keats, dying before he reached his prime, while on the
very verge of the promised land of Fame; of Byron, self-exiled, his
splendid muse embittered by private woes; of Shelley, piteously drowned
before he had time to measure his own vast intellectual forces?--while
you, my good Lord, fostered by a nation's love and recognition, have
experienced no such cutting cruelties at the hand of destiny. Perhaps,
indeed, you have been too fortunate, and continuous prosperity has made
you careless and over-easily satisfied with the lightest trifle of
verse that suggests itself to your fancy. But if you are careless, you
need not be crusty. The British Public has been likened unto an Ass by
many, but to my thinking it is more like a dog--an honest, good-natured
dog who never bites except under the severest and most repeated
provocation. As a dog it has fawned at your footstool, looked up in
your eyes affectionately and wagged its tail persistently--have you no
other response to such fidelity save a kick or a blow? Oh, fie on such
ill-humour--such uncalled-for cantankerousness! Why should you seek
to be "protected" from those who would fain do you honour? We should
all like to see you sometimes, in society, at theatre or opera, at
flower-show and harmless festival; we should like to say to one another
on beholding you, "There is our Laureate--our grand old Tennyson, one
of the glories of England!" We should not harm you by our affection. We
have no design upon your life, save to pray that it may be guarded and
prolonged. Believe me, it would be far more natural, and, let me add,
more Christian (for I knew by your noble lines "Across the Bar" that
you have not smirched your white flag of song with the ugly blot of
atheism) if you could persuade the world to understand that a journey
or a sea-voyage in the company of England's Laureate, were it possible
to devise such an out-of-the-way form of pleasure, would be one of the
most cheery, prosperous, and ideal trips ever made; that the heart of
the great poet-thinker was so expansive and warm, that even the tiny,
toddling children adored him; that his sympathy was so vast that the
poorest and most unhappy scribbler alive was sure to have a genial
word from the "singing lips that speak no guile"--in brief, that every
soul on board the good ship sailing sunwards, must needs be better,
happier, wiser, and more full of the milk of human kindness for those
few days passed in the near presence of the golden-voiced Minstrel of
the legended Arthur's court. Why, good my Lord Alfred, should you, of
all people in the world, preach and not practise? You, whose majestic
figure seems already receding from us through the opening portals of
the Unknown--why should you not stretch out hands of benediction on us
ere you go? You are leaving us for other lands, dear Poet, and we all
stand gazing after you sorrowfully, waving "farewell!" while the fond
and foolish women we love, waft you kisses amid their tears; praise and
thanks and blessings to the last from us, my Lord--and will you give us
nothing better at parting than a frown? Of a truth there are countless
worlds in the universe beside this one; only we cannot follow you where
you are going, and so we know not whether you may find a kingdom in
the stars better than Shakespeare's England. But whatsoever is deemed
the highest reward among high Immortals, that reward we desire may be
yours; for all the happiness which pure thoughts, sweet music, and
tender song can give, you have given to the little country you are soon
to see the last of. The end is not yet indeed, but it is nigh.

It is not the people, my Lord, the people on whom you have bestowed
the life-long fruits of your genius, who are to blame for the grossly
ill-judged and indelicate speculations that have lately been rife as
to who shall occupy your throne and wear your crown, when you shall
have resigned both for larger labours. It is the Press, with which the
people have really nothing to do. And as to the Laureateship, I, like
every one else, have my ideas, not of putting in a claim for the post,
(though I could, at a push, write blank verse, quite as prettily and
inanely as Lewis Morris), but of making it of wider application. After
yourself I consider that no one should be permitted to hold it as you
have done for an entire lifetime. It should be given to the deserving
bard for five or seven years, no longer; and at each expiration of the
appointed period there should be a brisk competition for the right
of succession. Such an arrangement would give a great impetus to
literature generally, and the recurring competitions would waken up
society to a sense of artistic feeling and excitement. Moreover, to
keep pace with the demands of the time, when the people are supposed to
be worthy of having a voice in everything, the election of England's
Laureate should be voted for by England's Public, and not left to the
decision of a Clique. Cliquism would put an end to all possibility of
fair play or justice, as it always does. To keep this public judgment
up to a certain intellectual standard, every householder paying rent
and taxes amounting together to not less than £200 per annum, should
have a vote; and, because women are frequently the best readers and
judges of poetry, one woman in every such household should also be
entitled to a vote. The result of the plan would be that by degrees
society would become interested in Poetry, which by tradition and
heritage is distinctly the first of the Fine Arts--and would take pains
to understand it, by which piece of additional education nothing would
be lost to civilisation, but rather much might be gained in gentleness,
quick perception, and fine feeling. It would be a safer and more
respectable line of study at any rate than turf speculations. But, like
all good ideas, it will, I suppose, have no chance of acceptance, in
which case, rather than see inferior men, like Morris or Edwin Arnold,
in the position which you, my Lord, have so greatly dignified, I would
say with others whom I know, "Abolish the post, and let Tennyson be
our last Laureate." For there is no one fitted to occupy it after
you, unless it be some singer unknown to the Log-rolling community.
Therefore, it would be best for England, in losing you, to also lose
the very name of Laureate, save as a noble and unsullied memory.

You see how truly my devotion turns towards you, my dear Lord, though
you will have none of it, nor of any such "outside vulgar" sympathy.
A recent letter of yours to me contains the following sentence: "_I
sometimes wish I had never written a line_." Alas, good Nestor among
modern bards, has Fame brought no happier end than this? No more than
spleen and peevishness? Suppose, for sake of argument, this curious
wish of yours had been granted, and you had never "_written a line_."
Well? What of the glory of renown?--what of the peerage which descends,
a poet's mantle, on your heirs? what of the creature comforts of
Haslemere and Freshwater?--what of the good honest cash that is paid
for every airy rhyme that is blown from your imagination as lightly
as the winged pine-seed from its cone? If you had "_never written a
line_," would you have gained anything? Nay, surely you would have lost
much. Therefore, why carp and cavil in the radiant face of Fortune,
the smiling goddess who has never deserted you since the publication
of your first volume? Cheerly, cheerly, good heart! Lift up your head
and look frank kindness on the world! It is not a bad world after all,
and whatever its faults, it loves you. Let it see you at your best and
friendliest before you say "Good-bye!"

When I was very youthful and imaginative, I used to believe implicitly
in that old fairy legend (known to Shakespeare as well as myself) which
declares that toads "ugly and venomous" have precious jewels in their
heads. And I had a special partiality for toads in consequence. I used
to assist them respectfully with a stick when they came panting out
under the leaves in hot weather in search of water, and guide them
gently towards the object of their desires. When a toad stared at me
fixedly with his peculiarly bright eyes, I felt vaguely flattered.
I had an idea that perhaps he might be intellectually capable of
making a will and leaving me his brain-jewel. Needless to say I was
disappointed; no toad ever fulfilled the hopes I had of him. But
since those green and happy days I have gained an insight into the
hidden meaning of the fable--which is, of course, that unfascinating
and personally disappointing individuals may possess the greatest
intellectual powers. Now there is one man who is distinctly inimical
to me, personally speaking, and yet I am fain to do his "brain-jewel"
justice. I allude to Algernon Charles Swinburne, whom, to meet on his
way to and from "The Pines," Putney, serves as a revelation. The first
impression one gets is of a small man with large feet, walking as if
for a wager, arms swinging hither and thither, and fingers briskly
playing imaginary tunes in the air as he goes. Then, as the eccentric
shape comes nearer, one is aware of a stubbly beard, and peeping eyes
expressive of mingled distrust and aversion; a hideous hat is clapped
down over the broad brow, which hat when lifted displays a bald expanse
of skull bearing no sort of resemblance whatever to the counterfeit
presentments of Apollo, and yet, incongruous though it seem, this
little, nervous, impatient, querulous being is no other than the author
of the "Triumph of Time," one of the finest poems in the English
language; and these twiddling restless fingers penned the majestic,
burning, beautiful "Tristram of Lyonesse," a book which, like an
imperial jewel-casket, is literally piled with gems. To look at the man
and to think of his poems at the same time is enough to make one gasp
for breath. It appears quite impossible to realise that this solitary
biped trotting full speed to Wimbledon should have written such lines
as these:--


     "I shall never be friends again with roses,
       I shall loathe sweet tunes, where a note grown strong
     Relents and recoils, and climbs and closes,
       _As a wave of the sea turned back by song_."


One can, however, easily believe that he wrote of himself in the
following passage:--


     "_But who now on earth need care how I live?_
     Have the high gods anything left to give
     Save dust and laurels and gold and sand?
     Which gifts are goodly; but I will none."


Swinburne, like Tennyson, manifests a great abhorrence for the
society of his fellow-creatures, but his shrinking churlishness is
more accountable to the world than that of the elder bard. Tennyson's
muse is pure, refined, and ever persuasive to good; while at times
Swinburne seems possessed of a very devil of lewdness and atheism; and
lewdness and atheism are not yet openly accepted as desirable parts
of a liberal education. Of his former rank and rampant republicanism
nothing need be said; the politics of a poet are always the most absurd
and shifty part of him. And though lewdness of the pen is beginning
to be more tolerated than once it was, thanks to the importation of
such foreign trash as the "Kreutzer Sonata" and other publications of
a like free-and-easy pruriency, the love of moral filth is not yet
universal. We are dabbling in mire, but we do not willingly wallow in
it--at least, not at present. The honest British guffaw of laughter
that greets crazy old Ibsen's contemptible delineations of women,
has a jovial wholesome music in it which the caterwauling of cliques
cannot silence. And there is a strong under-current of feeling in
the peoples of nearly all countries, that whatever prose-writers may
choose to do by way of degrading themselves and their profession, poets
should draw the line somewhere. Poor paralytic old Mrs. Grundy still
pretends, in the most ridiculously senile way, to be quite shocked at
the idea of reading "Don Juan," when, as a matter of fact, she has put
on strong spectacles over her blear eyes in order to gloat upon far
worse literary provender. There is not a line that Byron ever wrote
approaching to the revolting indecency of Swinburne's "Faustine"--a
most disgusting set of bad verses, let me tell Algernon, with my
frankest compliments. The only excuse that can be offered for such
a sickening affront to the very name of poetry, is that the writer
must have been suffering at the time he wrote it from a sort of moral
disease.

From moral disease no moral health can come--and in spite of
Swinburne's unquestioned and unquestionable genius, I believe his fame
will perish as utterly and hopelessly as a brilliant torch plunged
suddenly in the sea. There is no stamina in him--nothing to hold or
to keep in all this meteor-like shower of words upon words, thoughts
upon thoughts, similes upon similes; there lacks steadiness in the
music; none of the vast eternal underthrobbings of nature give truth or
grandeur to the strain. It is the harsh raving and shrill chanting of a
man in fever and delirium; not the rich pulsing rhythm of a singer in
noble accord with life, love, and labour.

One of the most unpleasant characteristics of Swinburne's muse is the
idea conveyed therein of the sex feminine. Women are no better (and
rather worse) than wild animals according to this poet's standard; or
if not animals, passive creatures, to be "bitten" and "sucked" and
"pressed" and "crushed" as though they were a peculiar species of grape
for man's special eating. Their hair is "woven and unwoven" recklessly
till one feels it must surely be plucked out by the roots; their
"flanks" are supposed to "shine," their "eyelids" are "as sweet savour
issuing;" and the following vaguely comic lines occur in "Anactoria":--


     "Ah, ah, thy beauty! _like a beast it bites_,
     Stings like an adder, like an arrow smites.
     Ah, sweet, and sweet again, and _seven times sweet
     The paces and the pauses of thy feet_!"


More preposterously insane nonsense than this it would be difficult to
find on any printed page extant.

It will be chiefly on account of his utterly false conception of life
and the higher emotions of the human heart, that Swinburne will not
leave the great name he might have left had he recognised the full
dignity of his calling. He had the power, but not the will. I say he
"had" advisedly, because he has it no longer. His last productions are
positively puerile as compared with his first, and each new thing he
writes shows the falling-off in his skill more and more perceptibly.
His similes are heavy and confused; his strained efforts at impossible
paradox almost ludicrous. This is the kind of thing he revels in:--


     The formless form of a mouthless mouth,
     And the biteless bite of a tooth that has gone.


We are, perforce, thrown back on the "Poems and Ballads" and "Tristram
of Lyonesse," compelled to realise that in these two books we have
got all of Swinburne that we shall ever get worth reading--all the
concentrated fire of that genius which is dying out day by day into
dull ashes. Theodore Watts, practical, friendly Watts, something of a
poet himself in a grave and lumbersome way, can do nothing to revive
that once brilliant if lurid glow that animated Algernon's formerly
reckless spirit. It is all over--the lamp is quenched, and the harp
is broken. It would have been almost better for Swinburne's fame had
he died in his youth, consumed, like the fabled Phœnix, by the fierce
glare of the poetic hell-flames he had kindled about himself, rather
than have lived till now to drivel into a silly dotage of roundels
concerning babies' toes and noses and fingers, which are assuredly
the most uninteresting subject-matter to the lover of true poesy. His
attempts, too, in the "Border-Ballad" style are the weakest and most
unsatisfactory imitations of the rough but vigorous original models.
And while on the subject of imitation, it is rather interesting to the
careful student of poetic "style" to read the admirable translations
made from the earlier Italian poets by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and
compare them with some of Swinburne's earlier pieces. It will be
remembered that Swinburne was at one time of his life much in the
company of Rossetti, and he would most probably have heard many
of these translations read before they were published; anyway, the
similitude of measure and rhythm between Rossetti's "renderings" and
Swinburne's "originals" is somewhat striking.

Personally, I am inclined to think that the worthy Algernon Charles
caught his particular trick of rhyming and rounding his verse in the
fashion now known as "Swinburnian" entirely from the Italian school
of Guido Cavalcanti, Rinaldo D'Aquino, and others of their time, as
well as from a few old French models of the François Villon type. His
actual masterpiece, a work which contains no such borrowed juggleries
of rhyme, is "Tristram of Lyonesse." This great poem is not half so
well known as it ought to be--most people appear never to have heard
of it, much less to have read it. In perusing its pages, one scarcely
thinks of the author save as the merest human phonograph through which
Inspiration speaks--in fact, it is rather curious to realise how little
we really do take the personal Swinburne into our consideration while
reading his works, or for that matter the personal anybody who has
ever done anything. Personalities are very seldom really interesting.
It is only when we have a wild, wicked Byron that we are fascinated by
"personality"; a man who turns upon us, saying that he is--


                   "only not to desperation driven,
     _Because not altogether of such clay
     As rots into the souls of those whom I survey_."


Well, well! And what of Browning? Why, Browning is dead. Moreover, he
is buried in damp, dirty, evil-smelling Westminster Abbey. What more
would you have for him? Fame? Let be, let be; he had Notoriety. That
must suffice, and that being done, why, all is done, and there is no
more to be said. Notoriety is not Fame. Fame is not Notoriety. No man
can have both, though he may cheat himself into taking the lesser for
the greater, and die happy in the pleasing delusion. Even so Browning
died; even so was he honourably interred. May he rest in peace. Amen.




XV.

OF MORE POETS.


Are there no other poets in the crowd save Tennyson and Swinburne? God
bless my soul, you don't suppose I am going to offend a whole mob of
verse-writers--no other poets? Of course there are others! no end of
others. Poets over-run our land even as the locusts over-ran Egypt, and
they are all "as good, and a darned sight better," as the Yankees say,
than either the Laureate or Algernon Charles, in their own opinion.
Mark that last clause, please; it is important. The number of "poets"
so styled by themselves is legion; only I, who am a rudely-opiniated
and fastidious masquer, decline to recognise their clamorous claims
to the deathless laurel. But this does not matter. Who cares what
I either decline or accept? My opinions are "nothing to nobody." I
only express them for my own satisfaction and amusement; I have no
other good to gain thereby. As for the chance of offending the "poets"
alluded to, I certainly care not a jot. I have no desire to please them
in any way, as I consider most of them an offence and an obstruction
in literature. Some people run away with the notion that Edwin Arnold
(I give him the full glory of his "Sir" and C.S.I. elsewhere) is a
poet. Certainly his books sell. The "Light of Asia," with all its best
bits taken out of the original "Mahabhârata," is a perfect triumph of
verse-making. All the religious ladies read it because it is so very
unexciting and heavenly and harmless, and because, like all pious
poetry, it preaches virtue that no one ever dreams of practising. It
is a capital book for school prizes, too; it will not hurt any boy or
girl to read it, and it may providentially check them in time from
trying to write verse themselves. As for the "Light of the World,"
it will probably meet with the same success among the same class of
readers, though it is much inferior to the "Light of Asia," owing to
having no "Mahabhârata" in it. But Lewis Morris is quite as great a
favourite with the "goodys" of society as Sir Edwin. The "goodys" don't
know, and don't want to know, anything about Dante's "Inferno," and are
therefore quite satisfied to accept "The Epic of Hades" as _bonâ fide_
"original" matter,--and there are some "sweetly pretty" lines in "A
Vision of Saints." Both productions are well adapted for gift-books,
and will suit the taste of the demure provincial "misses" who wish to
be discovered reading poetry under a shady tree what time the bachelor
curate of the parish passeth by. All the same, I, who am a Nobody,
decline to consider either Morris or Arnold poets. They are excellent
verse-compilers though, and suit the tastes of those who do not care
about either originality or inspiration.

I am nothing if not eccentric, and so I am disposed to place one
Alfred C. Calmour among the poets. He has published no poems--he has
only produced "poetical" plays, failures all, save "The Amber Heart,"
and he has been generally "sent to the right about" by persons with
infinitely less brain than himself. It is curious to observe what spite
and meanness waken in the manly breasts of certain of his fellows at
the mere mention of his name. I spoke in praise of "The Amber Heart" on
one occasion to a critical brother, and he at once said--"All filched
out of Wills's waste-paper basket; he was Wills's secretary." "What
of 'Cyrene'?" I asked. "Oh, I don't know anything about 'Cyrene'; but
if there's anything good in it, depend upon it, it is stolen from
Wills." I relapsed into silence, for I never thought and never shall
think anything of Wills, whereas I do think something of Calmour. He
is writing a drama, I hear, on "Dante and Beatrice," and I confess to
anticipating it with intense interest. I want him to do as my dear
friend Oscar Wilde has done--pulverise his enemies by a big success.
And why? Because I hate to see a hard-working man "sat upon." And
Calmour does work hard, lives hard too, and never complains or "girds"
at fate, wherefore I venture to prophecy fame for him one of these
days. I have been assured he is conceited. I have never found him
so. Suppose he were, is conceit a singular fault in authors? Are we
to believe that they are more boastfully disposed than actors, for
instance?

"What do you think of Calmour?" I asked E. S. Willard on one occasion,
when, in all the grave consciousness of "looking" _Judah_ to the
life, he stood beside me sipping convivial tea in Wilson Barrett's
drawing-room.

"Think of Calmour?" he replied, with an inimitable air of
self-sufficiency. "I never think of Calmour!"

Magnificent wind-bag assertiveness! but hopelessly unreasonable.
Calmour is more worth thinking about than Willard, only Willard
doesn't see it. The creator of a part merits greater consideration
than the mime who performs it. I confess to being a lover of fair
play, and when a lot of people try to "hustle" a man, I am disposed
to fight for him. Anyway, Calmour has a clean and delicate pen, and
does not pander to vulgar vice like that wretched old Scandinavian
humbug, Ibsen. Why we should abuse Calmour and praise Ibsen passes my
comprehension. Except that "foreign" scribblers are all "geniuses" with
us at once--they must be, you know, simply because they _are_ foreign;
they have a "subtlety," a "flavour," an "ardour," a "naturalism,"
and--a Nastiness which is not the legitimate inheritance of the English
School. Had any one of our own men dared to offer us a "Hedda Gabler,"
or a "Rosmersholm," or Maeterlinck's piece of bathos, "L'Intruse," he
would have been shrieked and howled down with derisive laughter.

I often wonder what on earth the faddists of the poor old doddering,
doting _Athenæum_ mean by poking and prodding about for sparks of
genius in their new "heavy man," William Watson? It is very funny
to call him a poet--very funny, indeed. He is a sort of fifth-rate
Wordsworth--and while we can just stand the sonnets and shorter poems
of Wordsworth at first-hand, a diluted example of his pattern in these
days is too much for our patience. I know a good many people--in fact,
I meet in social intercourse nearly everybody worth knowing--but as yet
I have come upon nobody who reads Watson's poems, or who appear to know
anything about Watson. Curious, isn't it? The _Athenæum_ seems to carry
no conviction whatever to the Ass-public.

Messrs. Trübner sent to me some time ago a book of poems, which first
surprised and then fascinated me into the belief that I had discovered
an English Petrarch. I think I have, too. If absolute music, perfect
rhythm, and exquisite wording of love-thoughts are Petrarchian, then
my man is a Petrarch. His book is called "A Lover's Litanies," and the
"litanies" are the poems. There are ten of them, and each one has a
title borrowed from the old church missal--rather a quaint idea. It
would be difficult to match the one called "Vox Amoris" among all the
love-poems of the world. Does the dear old purblind _Athenæum_ know
anything about this real poet, who has perhaps not been "discovered" by
Mr. Grant Allen or Andrew Lang? Cheer up, old _Athenæum_, put on thy
spectacles, and look about for the author of these "Litanies," lest the
outer world should say thou art napping! People are reading "A Lover's
Litanies"--those people who do not know anything about William Watson.

Robert Louis Stevenson started as a "poet," I believe. Now he has
become the "Thucydides of literature"--_vide Pall Mall Gazette_.
Such nice, pretty classical names the _Pall Mall_ discovers for its
particular darlings. Has the _Pall Mall_ read Thucydides? I rather
doubt it. I have, and find no resemblance to Mr. Stevenson. And, truth
to tell, I preferred Mr. Stevenson's past poetry to his present prose.
Yet why should I murmur, remembering the sweet, sound slumber into
which I fell over "The Wrecker"--that trying mixture of Marryat and
Clark Russell. I think it is a capital story for schoolboys though, and
that is why the _Pall Mall_ admires it. I am not a schoolboy; the _Pall
Mall_ is; a dear, bright, gamesome, peg-top-and-marble creature, who
thinks the greatest joke in life is to break a neighbour's window or
ring a neighbour's bell, and then run away laughing. Its animal spirits
are too delightfully boisterous for it to appreciate any sort of deep
sentiment; a story of strong human passions, or a romance in which
love has the most prevailing share, would not appeal to its unlessoned
fancy. And, very naturally, it appreciates Stevenson, because he gives
it no hard, uncomfortable life-problems to think about.

Another "poet" who calls himself so is Hall Caine. He says the
"Scapegoat" is not so much a novel as a drama, and not so much a drama
as a "poem." Very good indeed! Excellent fooling, upon my life. Hall
Caine can be very funny if he likes, though you wouldn't think it to
look at him. When he called his story of the "Bondman" a "New Saga,"
it was only his fun. His wit is quite irrepressible. Among other
humorous things, he has had his portrait taken in a loose shirt and
knickers, seated facing the bust of Shakespeare, like a day-labourer
fronting the Sphynx. It is altogether refreshing to find a Lilliputian
literary ephemera so entirely delighted with himself as Hall Caine.
He is much more convinced of the intrinsic value of his own genius
than Oscar Wilde, with less reason than Oscar for his conviction.
Oscar is a really clever man; Hall Caine tries to be clever and does
not succeed. Oscar is a born wit, moreover, and though he does crib a
few _bon-mots_ from Molière and a few paradoxes from Rochefoucauld,
what does it matter for the English who do not understand French, and
have to get "books of the words" in order to "follow" Sarah Bernhardt.
Besides, Hall Caine borrows from the French also; the plot of his
"Scapegoat" is taken from the French, so one of my critical friends
assures me, and critics are always right. Francis Adams (also a "poet")
"went" for Hall Caine not long ago in the _Fortnightly_--a regular good
knock-down thrust it was, too. But Adams's prowess is of no avail in
these things. The more you abuse a fellow, the more his books sell.
The best way to utterly damn an author is to say that his novels are
"nicely written," "prettily told," "harmless fiction," or "innocuous
literature." If these phrases do not finish him off, nothing will. An
original, powerful, passionate writer is always "slated," and always
"sells." Witness the career of one Emile Zola. With all his faults,
the man is a great poet; realism and romance unite in strange colours
on his literary palette, and with his forceful brush he paints life
in all its varied aspects fearlessly and without any regard for
outside opinions. His one blemish is the blemish of the whole French
nation--moral Nastiness. But if we talk of "poets" who, though making
their bread-and-butter out of the writing of prose, still insist on
belonging to the gods of Parnassus, none of the stringers of rhyme and
jinglers of ballads, and weavers of "sagas" and the like, that afflict
this enlightened and imaginative nation, could write such a true poem
from end to end as "Le Rêve." Such consummate art, such unravelling of
exquisite romance out of commonplace material, is not to be discovered
in the English literary brain. The English literary brain is dull,
lumpish, and heavy--the English literary worker is dominated by one
idea, and that is, how much hard cash shall he get for his work? And
thus it is that poets, real poets, are rarer than swallows in snow; so
that is why I am slightly exercised in my mind respecting the Petrarch
sort of minstrel I spoke of a while ago. He is unquestionably a poet,
and seems to get on without any "booming." This strikes me as very
odd. However, most of the "best" men go unboomed. No occasion to puff
a good article. As for the pretended poets, countless as the sands of
the sea, there is a great consolation in the reflection that in a few
more years they will all be as though they never had been. Good old
Posterity will know nothing about them, and herein Posterity is to be
heartily congratulated. Poetical gnats must live like other gnats, I
suppose--they are rather troublesome, and make a buzzing noise in one's
ears, but as their whole existence lasts no more than a day, we must
have patience till the sun sets.




XVI.

TO A MIGHTY GENIUS.


     "O Rudyard Kipling! Phœbus! What a name,
     To fill the speaking trump of future Fame!"


This, with apologies to the shade of the "loose ungrammatical" Byron,
as the perfectly grammatical Gosse calls him. Dear Gosse! He has
cause to be somewhat irritated with his own career as a poet, for he
has not yet "set the Thames on fire," as he expected to do with the
torch of his inspiration. Hence he was compelled to vent his pent-up
spleen somehow, and what better dead giant to fall upon and beat with
pigmy blows of pigmy personal vexation than Byron, whose Apollo-like
renown (with scarce an effort on his own part) sent thunders through
Europe. Oh, grammatical Gosse!--but never mind him just now; I
must concentrate my soul on Kip; on Rudyard; on the glory of this
literary age. Let me look at you, you blessed baby! treasure of
its own Grandmother Journalism's heart! There you are, crowing and
chuckling, small but "virile," every inch of you, though you are not
overstocked with hair on the top of that high head of yours, and it
is hard to begin life by viewing it through spectacles. But _as_ you
are, there you are! and my pulses leap at the sight of you. Fielding,
Sterne, Thackeray, Dickens, all these parted spirits have, as it
were, distilled themselves into a fiery fluid wherewith to animate
your miniature form; was ever such a thrilling wonder? Hear we good
Uncle _Blackwood_, the while he dances you upon his gouty knee:--"If
her Majesty's Ministers will be guided by us (which perhaps is not
extremely probable; yet we confess we should like the command of a
Minister's ear for several shrewd suggestions) they will bestow a Star
of India without more ado upon this young man of genius who has shown
us all what the Indian Empire means."

No doubt, good 'nuncle! no doubt the Ministry will listen to thy
"shrewd suggestions" what time the moon is made of ripe green cheese.
Go on, old man, go on, in thy cracked and aged pipe, growing wheezy
with emotion. "The battle in the 'Main Guard' is like Homer or Sir
Walter.... If her Majesty herself, who knows so much, desires a fuller
knowledge of her Indian Empire, we desire respectfully to recommend to
the Secretary for India that he should place no sheaves of despatches
in the royal hands, but Mr. Rudyard Kipling's books.... What Mr.
Rudyard Kipling has done is an imperial work, and worthy of an imperial
reward!"

Bravo, worthy 'nuncle! Homer begged his bread, but the pen-and-ink
sketcher of "Mrs. Hauksbee" shall have rewards imperial! To it again,
garrulous 'nuncle--to it and cease not! "Here, by the dignified hand of
Maga the ever young, we bid the young genius All hail! and more power
to his elbow, to relapse into vernacular speech, which is always more
convincing than the high-flown." Should it not have been written "to
relapse into bathos," good 'nuncle? And beware of declaring thyself
to be "ever young," for nothing lives that shall not grow old, and
the younger generation already profanely dub thee "antiquated." Wipe
thine eyes, Uncle _Blackwood_, polish thy spectacles, and set down our
precious baby for an instant the while his other nurses, godfathers and
godmothers, look at him, and speculate upon his probable growth.

Let us listen to the hysterical _D. T._ the while it raveth in strophes
of gin-and-water:--"Mr. Rudyard Kipling is, and seems likely to
remain, a literary enigma. Who can deny his strength, his virility,
his dramatic sense, his imaginative wealth, his masterful genius?
He is like a young and sportive Titan, piling Pelion on Ossa in his
reckless ambition to scale Olympus; he is always renewing his strength
like an eagle, and rejoicing like a giant to run his course. Nothing
comes amiss to him; he will produce out of his boundless stores
things new and old--tragedies, comedies, farces, epics, ballads, or
lyrical odes. His earliest Anglo-Indian stories revealed a new world
to the astonished West; his "Soldiers Three" have attained almost the
reputation of the "Three Musketeers"; his Learoyd, his Ortheris, his
Mulvaney, his Mrs. Hauksbee, his Torpenhow are household words; while
his barrack-room ditties, and his ballads of East and West have not
only startled by their daring frankness, but conquered all criticism by
their picturesqueness and truth."

All this, an' so please you, on two or three volumes of small magazine
stories and rhymed doggerel! That "Soldiers Three" should have attained
the reputation of the "Three Musketeers" is of course only the
delirious frenzy of the _D. T._ asserting itself in gasping shrieks
of illiterate mindlessness--Europe knows better than to place the
intellect of a smart newspaper man like Kipling on the same level with
that of Dumas. Kipling is the Jumbo of the _D. T._ for the present,
and journalists would not be what they are if they could not get up a
"boom" somehow. Now hark we to the fond maudlin murmur of an evening
journal!

"Where did Kipling get his ideas about Art from?" This is indeed a
pathetic question. It crops up in a paragraph-ecstasy over "The Light
that Failed." It is as if one should ask, "Where did Shakespeare get
his knowledge of the human soul from?" Where, oh where? We cannot, we
will not believe he has any imagination, this dear Kipling of ours,
because imagination is a thing we abhor. The triumphal and eternal
books of the world have all been purely imaginative, but this does
not matter to us. We, in this modern day, refuse to accept the idea
that anybody can describe a thing they have not seen and felt and
turned over and over under a microscope; we are so exact. And oh,
where then did Shakespeare (to revert to him again, because his is
the only name we can conscientiously compare with Kipling), where did
Shakespeare find Ariel and Caliban, and Puck and Titania, and Julius
Cæsar, and Antony and Cleopatra? He could not have seen these people?
No. Then, alas! he had that fatal gift, that monstrous blemish of
the brain which spoils true genius, Imagination--the grossest form
of cerebral disease. In this he was inferior to our Rudyard, our
hop-skip-and-a-jump Rudyard, who is actually going bald in his youth
from the strain of his minute observation of life, and the profundity
of his meditations thereon. Our "delectable one!" Our precious Kip!
Who would not join in the chorus of the paragraph-men when they
propound the fond, almost maternally-admiring query, "Where did he
get his ideas about Art from?" And then, when we find out that he
has "artistic" relations; that his papa is, or has been, painting a
ceiling or a wall in Windsor Castle, we naturally feel almost beside
ourselves with delight, because we find our baby's ideas are the result
of heritage, and have nothing to do with that curse of literature,
Imagination. As for me, I weep whenever I turn the sacred leaves of
"Plain Tales from the Hills," because I know I have in its pages all
that ever was or will be excellent in the way of fiction. There is
nothing more to be said--nothing more to come after. It is a sad
thought that fiction should have culminated here--it is always sad
to think that anything should have an end--but when the end is so
glorious, who shall complain? And so I have sold my set of Waverley
novels (the real Abbotsford edition); I have put my Shakespeare on an
almost unreachable top shelf (I only keep him for reference); I have
sent my Dickens volumes to a hospital, and my Thackeray to a "home for
incurables." I shall not want these things any more. The only natural
reflex of life as it is lived nowadays is to be found in the works of
Rudyard; on Rudyard I mentally feed and thrive. To Kip I cling as the
drowning sailor to a rope; all difficulties and perplexities in Art,
Literature, Science, Politics, Manners and Morals vanish at the touch
of his mighty pen--he is the one, the only Kip;--the crowning splendour
of our time. Why should we make any parliamentary pother over the
preservation of old buildings at Stratford-on-Avon? What do we want
with Stratford-on-Avon? since our Kip was born in India, or we believe
he was. Now, India is something like a place for a Genius to be born
in--big, vast, legendary, historical--and yet the American Interviewer,
conscious of Kipling's might, thinks it possible he may have already
exhausted its capabilities for literary treatment; swallowed it off at
one gulp as it were, like the precious pearl Hafiz consumed in his cup
of wine.

"Do you consider Mr. Kipling has exhausted India?" anxiously inquired
the American Interviewer of Rider Haggard, when the weary author of
"She" landed in New York.

"India is a big place," was the simple answer, given with a patient
gentleness for which Haggard deserves great credit, seeing how he has
lately been despitefully used and persecuted by the very reviewers who
once flattered him.

Yes, India _is_ a big place; not too big for our Kip though. He
requires to take life in Gargantuan gulps in order to support the
giant forces of his mind. But Stratford-on-Avon! A mere English
country town--hardly more than a village--what do we care about
it now? Shakespeare, after all, was perhaps only Bacon--but Kip is
Kip--there's no doubt about him--he is his own noble _bonâ-fide_ self,
whose bootlaces we are not worthy to untie. There is "stern strength,"
there is "virility," there is a "strong strain of humour," there is
"masculine vigour" in everything he writes. Mark the following passage
from "Watches of the Night":--

"Platte, the subaltern, being poor, had a Waterbury watch and a plain
leather guard.

"The Colonel had a Waterbury watch also, and for guard the lip-strap of
a curb chain."

Now, note that carefully--"_The lip-strap of a curb chain._"

What a luscious flowing sound there is in those few exquisitively
chosen words! "_The lip-strap of a curb chain!_" It is positively
fascinating. One could dream of it all day and all night too, for that
matter, like Mark Twain's famous refrain of "Punch in the presence
of the passenjare." But going on from this delicious line, which is
almost poetry, one finds instant practical information.

"Lip-straps make the best watch-guards. They are strong and short.
Between a lip-strap and an ordinary leather guard there is no great
difference; between one Waterbury watch and another, none at all."

Now, there we have the "strain of humour." No difference between one
Waterbury watch and another, "none at all." Ha, ha, ha! No difference
between one--ha, ha, ha!--Waterbury, ha, ha!--watch--ha, ha, ha!--and
another--ha, ha, ha!--none at all. Ha, ha! That "none at all" is so
exquisitely facetious! It comes in so well! Was ever such a delightful
little bit of sly, dry, brilliant, sparkling Wit, with a big W, as this
peculiar manner of our Kip! Turning over the leaves of this glorious,
this immortal "Plain Tales," you cannot help coming upon humour,
spontaneous, rollicking humour everywhere. It bristles out of each
particular page "like quills upon the fretful porcupine." Take this,
for example--

"One of the Three men had a cut on his nose, caused by the kick of a
gun. _Twelve-bores kick rather curiously._"

So they do. The remarkable part of this is that twelve-bores _do_
kick--it is a positive fact--a fact that every one has been dying to
have made public, and "rather curiously" is the exact expression that
suits their mode of behaviour. So true, so quaint is Kip. And here
is another charming bit of expression--a descriptive picture, finely
painted. It is from "The Arrest of Lieutenant Golightly."

"His boots and breeches were plastered with mud and beer stains. He
wore a muddy-white, dunghill sort of thing on his head, and it hung
down in slips on his shoulders, which were a good deal scratched. He
was half in and half out of a shirt, as nearly in two pieces as it
could be, and he was begging the guard to look at the name on the tail
of it."

Now this requires thinking over, because it is so subtle.
The "muddy-white, dunghill sort of thing" is really a new
expression--quite new--and beautiful. It suggests so much! But you must
come to the humour--you must remember there was a shirt mentioned, and
that the hero was "begging the guard to look at the name on the tail of
it." I went off into positive convulsions of mirth when I first read
that passage. Falstaff's coarse witticisms seemed unbearable after
it. "To look at the name on the tail of it!" It is simply inimitable.
There is a jovial sound in the very swing of the sentence. And Private
Mulvaney! What a creation! Just listen to him--

"I'm a born scutt av the barrick-room! The Army's mate and dhrink to
me, bekase I'm wan av the few that can't quit ut. I've put in sivinteen
years an' the pipeclay's in the marrow av me. Av I wud have kept out
av wan big dhrink a month, I wud have been a Hon'ry Lift'nint by
this time--a nuisince to my betthers, a laughin' stock to my equils
an' a curse to meself. Bein 'fwhat I am, I'm Privit Mulvaney wid no
good-conduc' pay an' a devourin' thirst. Always barrin' me little
frind Bob Bahadur, I know as much about the Army as most men."

No wonder, after this, that the ever-watchful purveyors of "Literary
Gossip" rouse themselves up from lachrymose tenderness to positive
passion _in re_ this marvellous Rudyard, and speak of him as "the
stronger Dickens going forth conquering and to conquer."

The phrase, "the stronger Dickens," is coming it very strong indeed,
but--it's only the paragraph-men. These chroniclers of the time have
pathetically informed us how on one occasion Kip ran away from the
"clamour" (of the paragraph-men) to India to fetch his papa, and how
his papa came back with him, to look after him, I suppose, and protect
him from all the naughty, vicious people who wanted to blow his skin
out into the size of a bull when Nature meant him to keep to the
strict proportions of the other figure in the fable. Good Rudyard!
Already the bloom is off the rye, just slightly, for if we are to
believe the _Athenæum_, an Eden Phillpotts is "the new Kipling." "O
Eden Phillpotts! Phoebus! What a name! To fill the speaking-trump of
future Fame!" The "loose ungrammatical" Byron's lines fit Phillpotts as
excellent well as Kipling. Phillpotts is really a fine name in every
way--splendidly hideous, and available for all sorts of Savile Club and
_Saturday Review_ witticisms, such as--


     "Phill the Pott and fill the can
     Eden is our Coming Man!"


Or this, sung slowly with religious nasal intonation to the well-known
hymeneal melody--


       "The voice that breathed o'er _Eden_,
         From _Athenæum_ bowers,
     Said 'Phillpotts' stories must be praised,
         He is a friend of ours!'"


Think of it, Rudyard! think of it! Art ready to cope with Phill? Wilt
meet Potts on his own ground? Deem not thyself Eden's superior, for
he "understands," according to the _Athenæum_, "proportion, contrast,
balance, and the value of unhalting movement," things that inferior
persons like Scott, Thackeray, Balzac, and others had to study all
their lives long. Moreover, another journal dictatorially announces
that "novel-readers must prepare to welcome" Phillpotts. Mark that
"must"! That "must" would fain seize the Ass-public by the throat,
and make it eat Phillpotts like a turnip. But the Ass is a fastidious
ass sometimes--it likes to nose its food before devouring; it will
nose Phillpotts at its pleasure. Meantime, it is nosing thee, friend
Kipling, dubiously and with a faint touch of derision. Ridicule kills;
beware of it, my boy. And to avoid ridicule and secure dignity,
hist!--a side-whisper, meant kindly--_Put down your Boom business!_
Stamp it out. Hush it up. If you don't take my advice you'll regret it.
The thing has been over-done. You have had more friends than are good
for you; a few stanch foes would have brought you much more benefit
in the long run. When your ill-advised flatterers quote your jingly
"Barrack-Room Ballads" as though they were things immortal--when good
Frank Harris, of _Fortnightly_ prowess, imposes a growling recital of
scraps of your doggerel, "Fuzzy-wuz," on patiently-bored people sitting
at a social meal, with the air of one considering it a finer production
than "The Isles of Greece," or Shelley's "Cloud"--we say with Hamlet,
"Somewhat too much of this." In the year of grace 1900 "Barrack-Boom
Ballads" will have gone the way of all "occasional verse," and not a
line will remain in the memory of the public. The English people know
perfectly well what poetry is, and no critic will ever persuade them
that you can write it. At the same time no one wishes to deny your
surface cleverness or your literary ability. You are on the same rank
with Bret Harte, Frank Harris, Frank Stockton, Anstey, and a host of
others, and there is no objection taken to your standing along with
these; but there is objection, honest objection, made to your being
forced higher aloft than your compeers, by means of a ridiculously
exaggerated, aggressively ubiquitous "boom." When Walter of the
_Times_ rushed frantically into a court of law about his copyright in
a Kipling article (he having taken no such heed of any other author's
article till then), the outside public laughed and shrugged their
shoulders at the absurdity of the thing. From the fuss made, one would
have imagined that God Himself read the _Times_ every morning, and was
particularly interested in Kipling. This sort of nonsense never lasts.
The reaction infallibly sets in. Never was a name sent up sky-high
like a rocket, but it did not fall plump down like a stick. And so,
excellent Rudyard, beware! You are not "the greatest English author" by
a long way. In weak moments I admit that the newspaper-gushers work me
into a delirium-tremens of ecstasy about you, and, like my friend Frank
Harris, my hand trembles and my voice takes on a rich growl as I quote
"Fuzzy-wuz" and the "immortal" (alas!) "Tomlinson"--but in these fits
I am not answerable for my words or actions. When I put away "Plain
Tales" and "Life's Handicap," and forget all your press notices, I
can think of you calmly and quite dispassionately, as one literary
labourer among hundreds of others, who are all striving to put their
little brick into the building of the Palace of Art, and I perceive
that yours is a very small brick indeed! I fear it will scarcely be
perceived in the wall twenty years hence. And my present opinion of you
is--would you care to know it? Of course not, but you shall have it all
the same. I consider you, then, to be a talented little fellow with a
good deal of newspaper-reporter "smartness" about you, and an immense
idea of your own cleverness, an idea fostered to a regrettable extent
by the overplus of "beans" which gentle Edmund Yates, among others, is
sorry to have given you. You have some literary skill, and you use a
rough brevity of language which passes for originality in these days
of decadence, but you are shallow, Rudyard; as shallow as the small
mountain brook that makes a great noise in the rapidity of its descent,
but can neither turn a mill-wheel or bear a boat on its surface. Your
men characters are mostly coarse bears--unmannerly ruffians in their
speech at least--your women are, on the average, either trifling or
despicable. Though unlovable, they are, however, interesting for the
moment, but only for the moment. Because a good many of us know fellows
who are brave and "virile" and all the rest of it, and yet who are not
obliged to use a slang word in every sentence; and we also know women
who are not solely occupied with the subjugation of the "masculine
persuasion"; and we prefer these decent folk as a rule. But, whatever
your literary failings or attainments, and however you may display
them _in futuro_, be wise in time and put down your "boom." No man can
live up to a "boom"; it is not humanly possible. As for your "strong
strain of humour," I am disposed to accept that as a fact. It _is_ a
strain--your humour. Your hydraulic pump is for ever going, and if the
result is not always witty, it is flippant enough. And flippancy passes
for wit nowadays. "Chaff" has replaced epigram, except when one finds
a _bon mot_ in an old forgotten French play or novel, and passes it off
in English as one's own "to set the table in a roar." As a matter of
fact though, human life is tragic; and the comedy part of it is only
invented hurriedly and inserted by the clowns of the piece.

And now Kip--though I perceive you are staring at me, wondering who
the d----l I am--I will e'en leave you to your own devices, and, as the
police say, "move on." Not even with the aid of your spectacles can you
peer through the folds of my domino--not till I choose. I am not going
about masked always--oh no! You shall see me face to face one day. And
if, when these attractive features of mine are unveiled to your ken,
you find yourself at all put out by the familiar manner of my speech
to you, why, we will cross the Channel to some convenient scene of
action, and you shall order (if you like) pistols for two and coffee
for one. I am really one of the best of your friends, because I do not
flatter you. The only place on which my observations may hurt you is a
soft spot in every man's composition called Conceit. It is a spot that
bruises easily and keeps sore for a long period. But the true artist
requires to have this spot taken out of him if possible. It is as bad
as a cancer, and needs instant cutting. Again I say, I do not flatter
you. And if I had more time, I think I should possibly warn you against
one of _your_ "boomers," and _my_ dear friends, Daddy _Lang_-legs. He
has the caprices of a fine lady, has Daddy--you can never be sure when
he is going to be pleased or displeased. He may discontinue a promising
young "boom" quite suddenly, or on the other hand he may go on with it
for an indefinite period. Of course he is an adorable creature, only it
is not prudent to judge the position of all Literature by the phases of
his humour.

And so, ta-ta Rudyard! See you again by and by! Don't inflate that
little literary personality of yours too much, lest it should burst.
Don't you believe you are a "stronger Dickens"; it won't do. It's bad
for you. A little modesty will not hurt you; it is an old-fashioned
manner, but is still considered good form. Read and compare the greater
authors who never were "boomed"; who starved and died, some of them,
to win greatness; they who are the positive "Immortals," and whom
neither you nor any of us will ever distance; mistrust your own powers
and "go slow." If there is anything very exceptional in you, time will
prove it; if not, why, Time will sweep you away, my good fellow, as
remorselessly as it has swept away many another pampered and petted
"Press" baby out of the very shadow of remembrance. Don't swallow _all_
the "beans" my boy! Leave a few. Better die of starvation than surfeit!




XVII.

CONCERNING A GREAT FRATERNITY.


Ha! I spy a Critic. Hail fellow, well met! Whether you have a
strawberry mark on your left arm or not, you are my own, my long, my
never-lost brother. I love you as the very apple of mine eye! And to
speak truly, I love all critics, from the loftiest oracle to the lowest
half-crown paragraphist; they are dear to me as the fibres of my heart,
and I am never so happy as in their company. And why? Why, because I
am a critic myself; one of the mystic band; and, moreover, one of the
joyous throng wearing (for the present moment) the safety-badge marked
"Anonymous"; one of the pleasant personal friend-detectives who watch
the unsuspicious author playing his game of literary "baccarat,"
and, on the merest hint, decide that he is cheating. I shake the
unsuspicious author's hand, I break his bread, I drink his wine, I
smoke his best havanas; I tell him verbally that he is a first-rate
fellow, almost a genius, in fact, and then?--well, then I sneak
cautiously behind the sheltering sidewall of a leading journal with the
rest of my jolly compeers, and at the first convenient opportunity I
stab him in the back!--"dead for a ducat." And how we all laugh when
he falls, his foolish face turned up in dumb appeal to the callous
stars; he was a star-gazer from the first, we say, chucklingly--these
ambitious dunderheads always are!

By Heaven! there is nothing in all the length and breadth of literature
so thoroughly enjoyable as the life of a critic, if one were only
better paid. One is member of a sort of "_Vehmgericht_," or secret
inquisition, where great intellects are broken on the wheel, and small
ones escape scot free, not being dangerous. The only unfortunate thing
about it is that we are losing power a little. The public read too many
books, and begin to know too much about us and our ways, which is very
regrettable. We like to toss together our own style of literary forage
and force it down the gaping throat of the public, because somehow
we have always considered the public an Ass, whose best food was hay
and thistles. But our Ass has lately turned restive and frequently
refuses to accept our proferred nourishment. It snorts dubiously at our
George Meredith Eccentricity, it kicks at the phonographic utterances
of Browning, and it positively bolts at Ibsen. A disgusting Ass, this
public! It actually devours volumes we have decided to ignore--it
relishes poems which We pretend never to have heard of--it tosses its
head at novels which We recommend, and hangs fondly over those We
abuse; and it even goes and fawns at the feet of certain authors who
show unrestrained passion and idealism in their writings, and whom,
on account of that very passion and idealism, we have determined to
send to Coventry. My heart sank to zero on a recent occasion when the
editor of the _Academy_ said to me, despondently, "The time is past, my
friend, when criticism can either make or mar an author's reputation."
Good God! I mentally ejaculated; then what am _I_--what are _we_--to
do? What becomes of our occupation? If we may neither stuff nor flay
authors, where is our fun? And how are we to get our bread-and-butter?
The selling of three-volume novels alone will not keep us, though we
always add a little to our incomes by that business.

This is how we generally manage. A Three-volumer comes in "for review,"
nicely bound, well got up; we look at the title-page, and if it is
by some individual whom we know to be a power in one or other of
the cliques, we pay strict attention to it, cover its faults, and
quote platitudes as epigrams. But if it is by some one we personally
dislike, or if it is by a woman, we never read it. We simply glance
through it in search of a stray ungrammatical sentence, a misprint,
or a hasty slip of the pen. (The misprints we invariably set down
to the author, as though he had personally worked the printing-press
and muddled the type out of sheer malice.) We obtain a vague idea of
the story by this means, and if we find the ungrammatical sentence
or the slip of the pen we are happy--we have quite enough to go
upon. We tuck our Three-volumer under our arm and make straight for
a secondhand book-store (where we are known), and there we sell it,
after somewhat undignified bargaining, for three or five shillings,
perhaps more, if its author has any reputation with the public. Then
we go home and write half a column of "smart" abuse about it, or what
is worse, luke-warm praise, for which we are paid from about five
shillings to half a guinea, which, added to what we have wrested
out of our secondhand bookseller, makes a respectable little sum,
particularly when we get many Three-volumers, and effect many sales.
(Poverty-stricken editors who write all their "reviews" themselves,
or get their young sons and daughters at home to do it to save their
pockets, and who sell for their own advantage all the "books received,"
naturally make quite a decent thing out of it.) And we can take our
money always with the holy consciousness of having done more than our
duty.

Yet, considering the earnestness with which we go to work, we are
really very miserably rewarded. We do not make half such big incomes
as the authors we judge and condemn. I say this advisedly, because,
as a positive fact, the men and women writers whom we most hold up to
opprobrium are the wretches who make the most money. The very devil
is in it! The poets we go out of our way to praise, our Oxford and
Cambridge pets and our heavy men, don't "sell"; not as they ought
to (in our opinion), by any manner of means. And then they come to
us--these children of the Muse--and complain bitterly that certain
Press-ignored fellows, who never had a "boom" in their lives, _do_
sell. And it is all the fault of the Ass-public, and we are supposed to
be responsible for the humours of the Ass. It is too bad. We cannot
help it if the Ass persists in remaining idiotically ignorant of the
astounding wisdom contained behind the thick skull and solemn brow of
a certain dear and choice morsel of mannerism we know, who dwelleth at
Oxford, and who is called by some of his disciples "A Marvel." Aye,
a marvel so marvellous that he hath grown weighty with the burden of
his own wonder. And the phrase "I wonder!" is a frequent and favourite
murmur of this impassive phenomenon; this "leader" of an excessively
narrow literary "set"--this true "heavy father" of the little low
comedy of Clique. For the rest, his voice is mild and dreamy, his
eyes reserved and bilious, his step as of one in doubt, who deems the
morning come when it is yet but night. Of a truth he is a good and
simple goose, well stuffed with savoury learning; but whether the
world will ever benefit by the dish is a matter which only the world
itself can decide. Personally, I like the "Marvel"; I know him for a
harmless soul, a gentlemanly dull _poseur_, whose posing vexes no one
and amuses many. Only I have ceased to try and "write him up," because
I have read his classic novel, and having accomplished that daring and
difficult feat I consider I have done enough.

Among the minor entertaining experiences in the life of a critic are
the appeals made to one's "quality of mercy" by the tender green
goslings in authorship, who fondly imagine that by a coaxing word, or
a flattery delicately turned, they can persuade Us to praise them. I
saw a young woman striving to beguile my friend Lang in this way on
one occasion, using sundry bewitchments of eye and gesture for the
accomplishment of her fell purpose, and I caught a fragment of her soft
yet desperate petition. "I am sure you will say a good word for my
poems, Mr. Lang!" Her poems! ye gods and goddesses! A woman's poems,
and--Andrew Lang! Surely a Mephistophelian "ha, ha, ha!" rang out in
the infernal regions of log-rolling at such a ridiculous combination,
for when ever did the "Sign of the Ship" wave hopeful encouragement
to a female rhymester? No, no; Lang, like myself, must know better
than to give any foothold to the "vapid" feminine climber who wantonly
attempts to scale Parnassus (a mountain exclusively set apart for the
masculine gender), and threatens to overcome our "intensely moving,
intensely virile stern strength;" _vide_ publisher's advertisements of
our ever-glorious Kipling.

Another curious feature of the critical disposition is our rooted
dislike to be known as critics. In this we somewhat resemble those dear
old robbers of legendary lore who went out pillaging and murdering
merrily by night, and were the most perfect fine gentlemen in the
daytime. Such altogether fascinating fellows they were! But we play
our parts almost as cleverly, and I am sure with quite as much ease
and charm. In polite society we claim to be "literary men"; the term
is delightfully vague and may imply anything or everything. Some of
us, however, say boldly out and out that we are not critics, but
poets--_i.e._, not judges, but criminals. We feel quite proud and glad
when we have said this sort of thing. Take my amiable acquaintance,
William Sharp, for instance. _He_ says he is a poet, and he has a
most refreshingly ingenuous and positive faith in his own statement.
Few agree with him, but what does that matter, provided he is happy?
Then there is Edmund Gosse; he also says he is a poet, and so he is,
in a pretty daff-a-down-dilly, lady-like fashion. Only he sits as
critic on other poets occasionally, and, strange to say, is never
able to find anything in their productions quite equal to the sounds
once evoked from "Lute and Viol." "Young" McCarthy, Justin Huntly (he
is only called "young" lest he should be mistaken for "old"), he who
uttereth oracles concerning plays and playwrights, he not only says
he is a poet, but he once went so far as to call himself Hafiz--Hafiz
in London. Yes; very much in London. Between the real Hafiz and the
sham is a "great gulf fixed," and the ghost of the Persian singer is
more valuable to literature than all the McCarthy substance. Now as to
Edwin Arnold--Sir Edwin Arnold, C.S.I. (it never does to forget his
C.S.I.), the admirer of those pretty ladies whose portraits appear on
tea-trays--is he a poet?--is he a critic? Well, some of his own verses
were described in the journal with which he is, or used to be, chiefly
connected, _i.e._ the _Daily Telegraph_, as "the finest things that had
appeared since the New Testament." Now, I consider this pretty strong,
and I don't wish to comment upon it. If such an eulogy had been uttered
by some other newspaper we should have said that the reviewer was some
unduly excited personal friend who wanted to "use" Edwin afterwards for
his own private purposes, but in the _Daily Telegraph_, C.S.I.'s own
pulpit, it suggested--no matter what! Anyway, I am quite sure Edwin was
not in Japan at the time.

I come now to another point in our careers as critics, and not such a
very pleasant point either. We are the victims of toadyism. The little
men of the Press, the dwarfs of journalism, toady us to the verge of
distraction, as soon as we attain to Half-a-Guinea-a-Column power. Of
course we are really somebodies then, and we have to pay the penalty of
greatness. Still it is a bore. We are told all sorts of things that we
know are not true, concerning our "fine literary abilities," our "keen
discrimination," and our "quiet humour," but we are perfectly aware
all the time that such "flattering unction" is merely the distilled
essence of the most strongly concentrated humbug. No sane man, unless
he has some private end in view which he hopes to gain by blandishment,
would dream of giving us credit for "fine literary abilities," because
if we had such abilities we should be doing something more paying than
criticism. But our pigmy flatterers think we can swallow anything. Here
is a small specimen of what I call Press-toadyism, which was bestowed
on my dearest Andrew in _Galignani's Messenger_ by somebody calling
himself a _London Correspondent_. It purported to be a "review" of that
amazingly dreary production, "The World's Desire," which, whatever its
faults, had at least the effect of showing the joint authors thereof
exactly what position they occupied as compared to Homer. Otherwise
they might possibly have made some mistake about precedence. And thus
ran the glib remarks of the _London Correspondent_:--

"That some parts are well written (Mr. Lang's) and some badly written
(Mr. Haggard's), and that fights are many and blood is plentiful,
and that there are many bits of delightful verse (Mr. Lang's, of
course), and a cackling old person (the invention of Mr. Haggard
evidently);" but there! I need not go on. The inquisitive individual
who yearns to read the whole so-called "critique" can refer back
to _Galignani_ of December 8, 1890. The gratuitous and unnecessary
insolence to Mr. Haggard, and the equally unnecessary and gratuitous
licking-of-the-boots of Mr. Lang must have been decidedly offensive
to both authors. This _London Correspondent_ may be a man, but he
certainly is not a brother.

_Apropos_ of the subject of Press-toadyism, _in re_ my friend Andrew,
I must not forget here to chronicle my boundless admiration for that
elaborate and beautiful witticism once contained in the _Saturday
Review_. Criticising Andrew's "Essays in Little," the _Saturday_
said:--"The public may like Little, but they certainly prefer it Lang!"
_O mirabile dictu!_ Shade of Joe Miller, retire discomfited! Was ever
heard the like? What are the quips and cranks of a Yorick compared
to this? Poor and feeble are the epigrammatic sentences of Molière;
miserable to the verge of bathos every "happy thought" beside this
sparkling production of the _Saturday_; this scintillating firework of
atticism, launched with so much delicacy! Let me wipe my fevered brow,
moist with the dews of ecstasy; I had always hoped the _Saturday_ might
one day be witty, but I never thought to see the fond anticipation
realised. "Moribund," quotha? Never was the Jumbo of Reviews so frisky
or so full of life before! Glorious old _Saturday Slasher_! As our
American cousins say, "_Lang_ may you wave!" Whoever perpetrated that
delicious conceit on Andrew--Andrew, the very Pythias of my Damon
worship--let him look me up at the Savile Club, and if I am there when
he chances to call, he shall have such wine and welcome as can only be
offered by a Critic with cash to a Critic of humour!




XVIII.

EULOGISETH ANDREW.


In speaking of Andrew I wish it to be very distinctly understood that
there is only one Andrew; and he is "the" Andrew as pronouncedly and
positively as "the" Mactavish or "the" Mackintosh. He is, to use the
words of the old Scottish song, "Lang, Lang, Lang a'comin'," always
"a'comin'" it in every English printed journal and newspaper under the
sun. His finger is in every literary pie. His shrill piping utterance
is even as the voice of Delphic oracles, pronouncing judgment on all
men and all things. He is the Author's Own Patent Incubator. His
artificial warmth hatches all sorts of small literary fledglings
who might otherwise have perished in the shell; and out they come
chirping, all fuss and feathers, with as much good stamina as though
they had been nursed into being under the wings of that despised old
hen, Art. Andrew is better than Art, because he is the imitation of
Art, and he comes cheaper than the real article. The way in which
the old hen hatches her chicks is slow and infinitely laborious; the
Lang Patent Incubator does the work in half the time and ever so much
less worry. If you can only manage to place a literary egg close
enough to the Incubator for him to "take notice" as it were, why
there you are; out comes a chuckling author immediately and begins to
pick his food from the paragraph-men with quite an appetite. He is
quite a curious and wonderful institution in literature, is my dear
Andrew. The pensters have had all sorts of things "occur" to them in
their profession, such as "booms," "blackmail," "puffs," "burkings,"
"cliques," "literary societies," and the like, but I believe it has
been left to our time to produce a literary Incubator. Of course
Art goes on hatching strange birds in her own tedious and trying
way--birds that soar sky-high and refuse paragraph-crumbs--but then
they are a special breed that would have died of suffocation in the
Lang Incubator. And they are a troublesome sort of fowl at best; they
will never fly where they are told, never sing when they are bidden,
and are never to be found scratching up dust in the press-yard by
any manner of means. Now the Incubator produces no wild brood of
this kind. He hatches excellent tame chicks, who make the prettiest
little clucking noise imaginable, and scratch among the press-dust
with grateful and satisfied claws, the while they prune each other's
feathers occasionally with the tenderest "Savile" solicitude. Even
timid spinsters could take up such pretty poultry in their aprons
without harm. There are no horrible, snapping, strong-winged eagles
among them? Lord bless you, no! Andrew would never be bothered with
an eagle. It might bite his nose off! Eagles--_i.e._, geniuses--are
detestable creatures; you never know where to have them. And the
Incubator must know where to have his chicks, else how could he look
after them? Besides, geniuses always cause disaster and confusion
in the press-yard--they find fault with the food there, and object
to roost on the critically appointed perches. Fortunately, however,
they are rare; and when Art does let loose such big troublesome
chickabiddies the world generally lets them forage for themselves.
Andrew certainly never troubles his head about them--indeed, he does
his best to forget the unpleasant fact that they are flying about and
might at any moment pounce on his "yairdie" and make havoc of his own
carefully-incubated little literary brood.

Needless to say I am devoted to Andrew. He has done me the greatest
kindness in the world. He does not know how kind he has been; in fact,
he has such an open, guileless disposition that I believe he is quite
unconscious of the heavy debt of gratitude I owe him. I have often
thought I would try to express my sentiments towards him in some way,
but my emotions have choked me, and I have refrained. Besides, great
souls do not require to be thanked, and Andrew has a great soul. A
great soul and "brindled hair." These qualities make him what he is,
worthy of the admiration of all true Scots and inferior men. And of
the "inferior" I will stand second to none in Lang-worship. Have I
not followed him at a respectful distance when he has started off to
rummage old bookstalls in search of literary provender? And have I
not always admired the "pawkie" manner in which he has fathomed the
childlike ignorance of the British public? For are not the contents of
the books he picks up secondhand, forgotten, or unknown by the British
public? and is it not well and seemly that he, Andrew, should revive
them once more as specimens of pure Lang wit and wisdom? Certainly.
No one would do the Incubator the hideous injustice of imagining him
to be capable of any new ideas. New ideas have from time immemorial
been an affront and an offence to the reviewer, and Andrew is not
only a reviewer himself but the friend of reviewers. New ideas are
therefore very properly tabooed from his list. But for old ideas,
carefully selected and re-worded, no one can beat Andrew. He is a
wandering "complete edition" of ideas taken from "dead" as well as
living authors. As for poetry, I don't suppose any one will dispute the
right he has to the Laureateship. The stamp of immortality rests on
"Ballads in Blue China"--that same immortality which attends Kipling's
"Barrack-Room" marvels. These things will be read what time future
generations ask vaguely, "Who was Tennyson?"

Yes, Andrew, it is even so. You are a great creature, and a
useful creature too, because you can turn your hand to anything.
You are not dominated by any cerebral monomania. You are a Press
jack-of-all-trades, and, like G. A. S., could write as smartly about
a pin as about a creed. It is very clever of you, and I appreciate
your cleverness thoroughly. I have had the patience to listen to some
lectures of yours, sitting at your feet as at the feet of another
Gamaliel, drinking in the wisdom of the secondhand bookstalls without
a murmur. Only the most intense admiration of your qualities could
have made me do that. I have even managed to spell out some of your
calligraphy, which resembles nothing so much as the casual pattern
which might be made by a spider crawling on the paper after having
previously fallen into the ink. That was a feat performed in your
honour--a feat of which I am justly proud. Then again I shall always
love you for your frankly-open detestation of literary females. Females
who presume to take up our writing weapons--and use them almost as well
as we do ourselves--these are our pet aversion. We hate scribblers in
petticoats, don't we, good Andrew? Yea, verily! We loathe their verses,
we abominate their novels; we would kick them if we dared. We do kick
them, metaphorically, whenever we can, in whatever journals we command;
but that is not half as much as we would like to do. Almost we envy
Hodge who can (and does) give an interfering woman a good dig in the
ribs with his heavy hob-nailed boot whenever she provokes him; and in
the close competition for literary honours we would fain be Hodges too,
every man-jack of us. It is an absurdity that should not be tolerated
in any civilised nation, this admission of women into the literary
profession. What has she done there? What will she ever do? Ask Walter
of the _Times_ (he is a great authority) what he thinks of women who
write. He will tell you that they are merely the weak imitators of men,
and that they are absolutely incapable of humour or epigram. And I am
convinced he is right. Mrs. Browning, Charlotte Bronté, Georges Sand,
George Eliot, and others whose names assume to be "celebrated," are
really nobodies after all. Walter of the _Times_ could himself beat
them out of the field--if he liked. But he is too mercifully disposed
for this: he reserves his genius. Sparkling all over with witticism, he
only permits occasional flashes of it to appear in the columns of his
magnificent journal, lest the public should be too much dizzied and
dazzled. No wonder the _Times_ costs threepence; you could not expect
to get even a glimpse of a man like Walter for less. We ought to be
glad and grateful for his opinions at any price.

And these epithets "glad" and "grateful" occur to me as the only
suitable terms to apply to you, most super-excellent Andrew; my good
friend to whom I owe so much. I am glad and grateful to know that your
"lang" personality is a familiar object at so many newspaper offices.
I am delighted to feel that English literature would come to a dead
halt without your pleasantly long finger to push it on. It rejoices my
heart to realise what a power you are. I am lost in astonishment at
the extraordinary collection of Lilliputian authors you have hatched
by your incubating process. They are the prettiest little brood
imaginable, and what is so charming about them is that they are all so
tame and well-behaved that they will never fly. This is such a comfort.
Just a little scurrying and flopping through the press-yard is all
they are capable of, and quite enough too. Comfortable hencoop sanity
in literature is the thing; we don't want any of Professor Lombroso's
maniacs in the way of geniuses about. They are dangerous. They do
strange things and break out in strange places, and often succeed in
stopping all the world on its way to look at them. Nothing would alarm
you so much, I assure you, my dear Andrew, as the involuntary hatching
of a genius. In fact, I believe it would be all over with you. You
could not survive.

But, thanks to a merciful Providence, you run no risk of this. The
old hen Art is a savage bird and lays her eggs among wild thorns and
bracken out in the open, where no man can find them to bring to you
for the artificial bursting heat of a "boom." You only get the dwarf
product of the domestic poultry of the press-yard. And these are
easily incubated by your patent process--in fact, they almost hatch
themselves, they are in such a hurry to chirp forth their claims to
literary distinction. But being fragile of constitution they need
constantly looking after, which I should imagine must be rather a bore.
Relays of paragraph-men have to come and throw corn and savouries all
the while lest your little chicks should die of inanition, they having
no stamina in themselves. Some will die, some are dying, some are
dead; yet weep not, gentle Incubator, for their fate. It better suits
thy purpose that such should perish, so long as thou dost remain to
hatch fresh fowl upon demand. The press-yard relies upon thee for its
stock of guaranteed male birds--its gifted "virile" roosters, whose
"cocksure" literary crowings may wake old Granny Journalism at stated
hours from too-prolonged and loudly-snoring slumbers; but produce no
hens, Andrew, for if thou dost, thou art a mistaken patent and workest
by a wrong process! Continue in the path of wisdom, therefore, and
faithfully incubate only masculine fledglings for the literary coops.
More we do not expect of thee, save that thou continue to be the king
of compilers and the enemy of blue stockings. For myself, personally
speaking, admiring thee as I am fain to do, I naturally implore thee to
go on in all the magazines and journals telling me the things I knew
before--the old stories I read when I was a thoughtless child, the
scraps of information familiar to me as copybook maxims, the ancient
jokes at which my elders laughed, the snatches of French romance and
fable I picked up casually at school. For being always a book-lover
it is but natural I should have learned the things wherewith thou
instructest the ignorant world; but thou shalt tell me of them again
and yet again, good Andrew, and yet I will not murmur nor ask of thee
one thought original. Aware of all thou canst say, I still entreat
thee, say it! Say it (to quote the jovial old _Saturday_ once more) in
"little," that I may have it "lang."

And now, ever famous and beloved Andrew, I must for the moment take
my leave of thee. The glory of thy reputation is as a band of light
around the foggy isles of Britain, and that benighted Europe knows
thee not at all is but a trifle to us, though a loss to Europe. When
Hall Caine recently found out that he was not celebrated in Germany
he wondered thereat and said the Germans had no taste for English
literature. No--not though they are the finest Shakesperian scholars
in the world and the most ardent lovers of Byron's poesy. "Benighted
Fatherland!" inwardly moaned the writer of "Sagas"--"Benighted
country that knoweth not my works! Benighted people that have never
heard--ye gods, imagine it!--have never heard the name of Kipling!"
Oh, dull, beer-drinking, Wagner-ridden disciples of Goethe, Schiller,
and Heine! To be ignorant of Kipling! To be only capable of a bovine
questioning stare at Caine! To be impervious to the electric name of
Lang! To know nothing about the new "Thucydides," R. L. Stevenson!
Heaven forgive them, for I cannot. I abjure the Rhineland till it has
been to school with Lang's text-books under its arm. Drop Heine, ye
besotted slaves of "lager-bier," and read Kipling. _Try_ to read him,
anyway. If you can't, my friend Andrew will show you how. Andrew
will show you anything that can be shown in English journals and
newspapers. But beyond these he cannot go. You must not expect him
to expand farther. His incubating work belongs solely to the English
Press Poultry-yard--his name, his power, his influence avail, alas! as
Nothing, out in the wide, wide world!




XIX.

BYRON LOQUITUR.


If I did not believe, or pretend to believe, in Spiritualism,
Theosophism, Buddhism, or some other fashionable "ism" which is totally
opposed to Christianity, I should not be "in the swim" of things. And
of course I would rather perish than not be in the swim of things.
I cannot, if I wish to "go" with my time, admit to any belief in
God; like Zola's Jean Bearnat, I say, "Rien, rien, rien! Quand on
souffle sur le soleil ça sera fini," or, with the reckless Corelli,
I propound to myself the startling question, "Suppose God were dead?
We see that the works of men live ages after their death--why not the
works of God?" The exclamation of "Rien, rien!" is _la mode_, and
those who are loudest in its utterance generally take to a belief in
bogies--Blavatsky bogies, Annie Besant bogies, Sinnett bogies, Florence
Marryat bogies, many of which disembodied spirits, by the by, talk
bad grammar and lose control over their H's. My jovial acquaintance,
Captain Andrew Haggard (brother of Rider), and I, have rejoiced in
the society of bogies very frequently. We have called "spirits from
the vasty deep," and sometimes, if all the "influences" have been
in working order, they have come. We know all about them. Haggard,
perhaps, knows more than I do, for I believe he confesses to being
enamoured of a rather pretty bogie--feminine, of course. She has no
substance, so the little flirtation is quite harmless. I regret to
say the "spirits" do not flirt with me. They don't seem to like me,
especially since the Tomkins episode. The Tomkins episode occurred
in this wise. At a certain _séance_ in which I took a somewhat too
obtrusive part a "bogie" appeared who announced himself as Tomkins.
Some one asked for his baptismal name, and he said "George." A devil
of mischief prompted me to hazard the remark that I once knew a John
Tomkins, but he was dead.

"That's me!" said the bogie, hurriedly. "I'm John."

"How did you come to be George?" I demanded.

"My second name was George," replied the prompt bogie.

"That's odd!" I said. "I never knew it."

"You can't expect to know everything," remarked the bogie,
sententiously.

"No, I can't," I agreed. "And, what is more, I never knew a Tomkins at
all, John or George, living or dead! You are a fraud, my friend!"

Confusion ensued, and I was promptly expelled as an "unbeliever" who
disturbed the "influences." And since that affair the "spirits" are shy
of me.

Whether the memory of the Tompkins episode haunted me, or whether
it was the effect of an excellent dinner enjoyed with "Labby"
just previously, I do not know, but certain it is that on one
never-to-be-forgotten evening I saw a ghost--a _bonâ-fide_ ghost,
who entered my sleeping apartment without permission, and addressed
me without the assistance of a "medium." He was a ghost of average
height and build, and I observed that he kept one foot very carefully
concealed beneath his long, cloudy draperies, which were disposed
about him in the fashion of the classic Greek. Upon his head, which
was covered with clustering curls fit to adorn the brows of Apollo, he
wore a wreath of laurels whose leaves were traced in light, and these
cast a brilliant circle of supernatural radiance around him. In one
hand he grasped a scroll, and as he turned his face upon me he beckoned
with this scroll, slowly and majestically, after the style of Hamlet's
father on the battlements of Elsinore. I trembled, but had no power to
move. Again he beckoned, and his eyes flashed fire.

"My lord----!" I stammered, shrinking beneath his indignant gaze, and
fervently hoping that I was not the object of his evident wrath.

"Lord me no lords!" said a deep voice that seemed to quiver with
disdain. "Speak, puny mortal! Knowest thou me?"

Know him! I should think I did. There was no mistaking him. He was
BYRON all over--Byron, more thoroughly Byronic of aspect than any
portrait has ever made him. Involuntarily I thought of the present Lord
Wentworth and his occasionally flabby allusions to his "Grandfather,"
and smiled at the comparison between ancestor and descendant. My
ghostly visitant had a sense of humour, and, reading my thoughts,
smiled too.

"I see thou hast wit," he was good enough to observe in more pacific
accents. "Hear me, therefore, and mark my every word! There are such
follies in this age--such literary rascals, such damned rogues of
rhymesters--oh, don't be startled! every one swears in Hades--that I
have writ some lines and remodelled others, to suit the exigencies
of the modern school of Shams. Never did Art stand at a premium in
England, but God knows it should not fall to zero as it is rapidly
doing. Listen! and move not while I speak; my lines shall burn
themselves upon thy brain till thou inscribe and print them for the
world to read; then, and then only, having done my bidding, shalt thou
again be free!"

I bowed my head submissively and begged the noble Ghost to proceed,
whereupon he unfolded his scroll, and read, with infinite gusto, the
following:--

"ENGLISH SCRIBES AND SMALL REVIEWERS.


     "Still must I hear? Shall SWINBURNE mouth and scream
     His wordy couplets in a drunken dream,
     And I not sing, lest haply small reviews
     Should dub me 'dead' and forthwith damn my muse?
     No! My proud spirit shall not suffer wrong;
     'Booms' are my theme--let satire be my song.

     "Through Nature's new-found gift, Magnetic skill,
     My soul obeys an influential Will,
     And I from Hades rise to life again
     To wield once more mine own especial pen,
     Which none have rivalled in these sickly days
     Of tawdry epics and translated plays,
     When knavish cliques o'er honest Art prevail,
     And weigh out judgment by the 'Savile' scale.
     The petty vices of the time demand
     Another scourging from my fearless hand;
     Still are there flocks of geese for me to chase,
     Still false pretenders to the 'poet's' place.
     Who dare to pile detraction on my name,
     Let such beware, for scribblers are my game!
     Speed Pegasus! Ye modern pensters small,
     WATTS, BRYDGES, MORRIS, ARNOLD, have at you all!
     Remember well how once upon a time
     I poured along the town a flood of rhyme
     So strong and scathing that the little fry
     Of rhymesters like yourselves were doomed to die!
     Moved by that triumph past, I still pursue
     The self-same road, despite the _New Review_
     And _Quarterly_, and other journals silly,
     That take dull articles by Mr. LILLY.

     "Most men serve out their time to every trade
     Save book-reviewers--these are ready-made.
     Crib jokes from Yankee journals, got by rote,
     With just enough of memory to misquote;
     Ignore all beauty; find or forge a fault;
     Revive old puns and call them 'attic salt';
     Then to the '_Speaker_' or to HENLEY go
     (The 'pay' for book-reviews is always low);
     Fear not to lie--'twill seem a ready hit;
     Shrink not from blasphemy--'twill pass for wit;
     Care not for feeling; launch a scurrilous jest,
     And be a critic with the very best!

     "Will any own such judgment? No, as soon
     Trust wavering shadows 'neath th' inconstant moon,
     Hope that a 'promised' critique will be done
     By bland O'Connor of the _Sunday Sun_,
     Believe that Hodge's claims will ne'er increase,
     Believe in GLADSTONE'S schemes for Ireland's peace,
     Or any other thing that's false, before
     You trust reviewers, who themselves are sore.
     Never let thought or fancy be misled
     By LANG'S cold heart or ALFRED AUSTIN'S head;
     While such are censors, 'twould be sin to spare;
     While such are critics, why should I forbear?
     And yet so near these modern writers run
     'Tis doubtful whom to seek and whom to shun,
     Nor know we when to spare or where to strike,
     The bards and critics are so much alike!

     "To bygone times my lingering thoughts are cast;
     Good taste and reason with those times are past!
     Look round and turn each trifling printed page;
     Survey the precious works that please the age;
     This truth at least let satire's self allow,
     No dearth of pens can be complained of now.
     The loaded press beneath its labour groans,
     And printers' devils shake their weary bones,
     While ARNOLD'S epics cram the creaking shelves,
     And KIPLING'S ballads shine in hot-pressed twelves
     'New' schools of twaddle in their turn arise,
     Where jingling rhymsters grapple for the prize,
     And for a time these psuedo-bards prevail;
     Each public 'library' assists their sale,
     And, hurling lawful genius from its throne,
     Takes up some puny idol of its own,
     And judges Poesy as just a cross
     'Twixt ASHBY STERRY, LANG, and EDMUND GOSSE.

     "Behold! in various throngs the scribbling crew,
     For notice eager, pass in long review;
     Each spurs his jaded Pegasus apace:
     Rhyme and romance maintain an equal race.
     The Grand Old Paradox of Hawarden
     Seizes in haste his too prolific pen,
     And, heedless how the reading world is bored,
     Thrusts to the front a MRS. HUMPHRY WARD,
     With 'Robert Elsmere' frightened out of faith,
     And 'David Grieve' a-prosing us to death;
     Next trumpets CAINE'S 'integrity of aim,'
     And gives to 'Mademoiselle Ixe' a name.
     O Gladstone, Gladstone! 'Boom' it not so strong
     Boomers may 'boom' too often and too long!
     If thou wilt write on impulse, prithee spare!
     More vapid authors were too much to bear;
     But if, in spite of all thy friends can say,
     Thou still wilt boomwards boom thy frantic way,
     And in long articles to stupid papers
     Thou still wilt cut thy literary capers,
     Unhappy Art thy fresh intent may rue;
     God save us, Gladstone, from thy next 'review'!

     "Lo, the mild teacher of the Buddhist school,
     The follower of the tamest blank-verse rule,
     The simple ARNOLD, with his 'Asia's Light,'
     Who wins attention by translation-right;
     And both by precept and example shows
     That prose is verse, and verse is merely prose,
     Convinced himself, by demonstration plain,
     There never will be such a book again,
     And never such a 'marvellous proper' man
     To charm the hearts of ladies in Japan!

     "Who out at Putney on the common strays,
     Unsocial in his converse and his ways?
     'Tis SWINBURNE, the Catullus of his day,
     As sweet but as immoral in his lay.
     Grieved to condemn, the Muse must still be just,
     Nor spare melodious advocates of lust.
     Pure is the flame which o'er her altar burns;
     From grosser incense with disgust she turns.
     Mend, SWINBURNE, mend thy morals and thy taste;
     Be warm, but pure; be amorous, but chaste;
     Thy borrowed fancies to Villon restore,
     And use old Scripture similes no more!

     "Behold! ye cliques; one moment spare the text!
     HALL CAINE'S last work, and worst--until his next!
     Whether he drafts his 'sagas' into plays,
     Or damns his brother authors with faint praise,
     His elephantine style is still the same,
     Forever turgid, and forever tame.
     Boom for the 'Scapegoat'! it has been re-writ
     To suit the measure of the critics' wit;
     'Bondsman' and 'Deemster' tweak each other's toes,
     And as a spurious 'genius' Caine doth pose,
     Taking himself and all his books on trust,
     And getting photographed with Shakespeare's bust!

     "Another book of verses? Who again
     Inflicts rhymed doggerel on the sons of men?
     'Tis Orient KIPLING, the reviewers' boast,
     The darling of the Anglo-Indian coast,
     Who, on cheap praise and cheaper conquest bent,
     Imports slang 'notions' from the soldier's tent,
     And crams his lines with 'Tommy Atkins' here
     And 'Tommy Atkins' diction everywhere--
     'Barrack-Room Ballads!' come, who'll buy! who'll buy!
     The precious bargain's low! 'i faith, not I!
     For RUDYARD'S verse, despite his 'boom,' is flat,
     Though critics bloat him with 'log-rollers'' fat--
     O RUDYARD KIPLING! Phoebus! What a name
     To fill the speaking-trump of future fame!
     O RUDYARD KIPLING, for a moment think
     What 'chancey' profits spring from pen and ink!
     Thy name already tires the public ear,
     One shilling for thy 'Tales' seems monstrous dear;
     For though they make a decent show of print
     The book as book of worth has 'nothing in 't'.
     O RUDYARD KIPLING! cease to scribble rhymes,
     And stick to ARTHUR WALTER of the _Times_;
     As 'Special Correspondent' or 'Our Own,'
     But for God's sake leave Poesy alone;
     Scratch not the surface of the mystic East
     With flippant pen dipped in reporter's yeast,
     For India's riddle is a riddle still
     In spite of any 'Plain Tale from a Hill,'
     The silent griefs of conquered tribes and nations
     Are not explained in military flirtations,
     Or 'ditties departmental,' trite of style,
     (Any 'jongleur' could scrawl them by the mile;)
     As 'Light that Failed,' thy race is nearly run,
     Thy goose is cooked; thy stuffing's over-done!

     "Lo, great 'Thucydides' of Samoa's isle
     Relieves his inspiration and his bile,
     And o'er the rolling ocean wide and deep
     Sends the _chef-d'œuvres_ that make his readers sleep.
     The 'Wrecker' comes and ponderously heaves
     O'er weary brains its soothing weight of leaves,
     And those who never knew that joy before
     Yield to the peaceful pleasure of the snore,
     And drowse in chairs at clubs in open day,
     Just as they drowsed o'er 'classic' 'Ballantrae.'
     Hail to 'Thucydides'! and hail the pen
     That writes him up above all other men;
     For sleep's a blessing, and whate'er may hap
     His works ensure a harmless, perfect nap.

     "Lo, with what pomp the daily prints proclaim
     The rival candidates for Attic fame;
     In grim array though HAGGARD'S Zulus rise,
     Yet 'Q' and dull GRANT ALLEN share the prize;
     Then come the little train of 'Pseudonyms'--
     A set of female faddists full of whims--
     Who pour their vapid follies o'er the town,
     Excusing Vice and sneering Virtue down;
     Next see good BENTLEY'S list of writers small:
     I wonder where the deuce he finds them all?
     Some 'novel new' he issues every week,
     A fiction of the kind that housemaids seek--
     Mild tales of goose-love, which he thinks may please,
     Sure only geese would purchase books like these!
     Broughton's half-vulgar, half-lascivious stories,
     And Mrs. Henry Wood's posthumous glories;
     Here Madam TROLLOPE whirls her small 'Wild Wheel,'
     There Mistress HENNIKER unwinds her reel,
     And silly 'fictionists' of no repute
     Spring up like weeds to wither at the root.
     Excellent BENTLEY! stay thy lavish hand,
     Continuous trash were more than we could stand;
     Give us good authors who deserve their name,
     And save thy once distinguished firm from shame;
     Give prominence to Genius--publish less,
     Or rivals new thy 'house' will dispossess,
     In spite of folks who think the works of Shelley
     Inferior to romances by CORELLI.

     "GRANT ALLEN hath a 'heaven-sent' tale to tell,
     But much he fears its utterance would not 'sell'
     Wherefore, to be quite certain of his cash,
     He writes (regardless of his 'inspiration') trash;
     Practical ALLEN! Noble, manly heart!
     Wise huckster of small nothings in the mart,--
     To what a pitch of prudence dost thou reach
     To feel the 'god,' yet give thy thoughts no speech,
     All for the sake of vulgar pounds and pence!
     God bless thee, ALLEN, for thy common sense!

     "Health to 'lang' Andrew! Heaven preserve his life
     To flourish on the sacred shores of Fife!
     Prosper good Andrew! leanest of the train
     Whom Scotland feeds upon her fiery grain;
     Whatever blessings wait a 'brindled' Scot
     In double portion swell thy glorious lot!
     As long as Albion's silly sons submit
     To Scottish censorship on English wit,
     So long shall last thy unmolested rule,
     And authors, under thee, shall go to school;
     Behold the 'Savile' band shall aid thy plan
     And own thee chieftain of the critic clan.
     KIPLING shall 'butter' thee, and thou sometimes
     Wilt praise in gratitude his doggerel rhymes,
     And HAGGARD, too, thy eulogies shall seek,
     And for his book another 'boom' bespeak;
     And various magazines their aid will lend
     To damn thy foe or deify thy friend.
     Such wondrous honours deck thy proud career,
     Rhymester and lecturer and pamphleteer,
     Known be thy name, unbounded be thy sway,
     And may all editors increase thy 'pay'--
     Yet mark one caution ere thy next review
     Falls heavy on a female who is 'blue.'
     Grub-street doth whisper that a 'ladye faire'
     Intends to snatch thee by the brindled hair
     And stab thee through thy tough reviewer's skin
     With nothing more important than a pin--
     A case of 'table turned' and 'biter bit';
     Heaven save thee, Andrew, from a woman's wit!

     "What marvel now doth Afric's zone disclose?
     A solemn book of rank blasphemous prose,
     Writ by a MISTRESS SCHREINER, who elects
     A Universal Nothing as her text;
     Whereat the _Athenæum_, doddering soul!
     Whimpers about the 'beauty of the whole,'
     And shrieks, in columns of hysteric praise,
     How such a work all nations should amaze:
     'Nothing has ever been or e'er will be
     Like Dreams'--produced by the blasphemous She;
     So writes the _Athenæum_ to the few
     Who still pay threepence for a bad review,
     And watch the hatching of the little plots
     Conceived and carried out by Mr. Watts.
     CHARLES DILKE! Come forth from Mrs. Grundy's ban,
     And show thyself to be the 'leading' man,
     With one strong effort snap thy social fetter
     And get thy prosy journal managed better!

     "Great Oscar! Glorious Oscar! Oscar Wilde!
     Fat and smooth-faced as any sucking child!
     Bland in self-worship, crowned with self-plucked bays,
     Sole object of thine own unceasing praise,
     None can in 'brag' thy spreading fame surpass,
     And thou dost shine supreme in native brass.
     Thou hast o'erwhelmed and conquered dead Molière
     With all the _mots_ of _Lady Windermere_;
     Thou hast swept other novelists away
     With the lascivious life of 'Dorian Gray.'
     Thine enemies must fly before thy face,
     Thou bulky glory of the Irish race!
     Desert us not, O Wilde, desert us not,
     Because the Censor's 'snub' 'Salome' got,
     Still let thy presence cheer this foggy isle,
     Still let us bask in thy 'æsthetic' smile,
     Still let thy dwelling in our centre be;
     England would lose all splendour, losing thee!
     Spare us, great Oscar, from this dire mischance!
     We'll perish ere we yield thee up to France!

     "Wise HARDY! Thou dost gauge the modern taste:
     Hence on man's Lust thy latest book is based--
     A story of Seduction wins success,
     Thus hast thou well deserved thy cash for 'Tess.'
     Pure morals are old-fashioned--Virtue's name
     Is a mere butt for 'chaff' or vulgar blame,
     But novels that defy all codes and laws
     Of honest cleanness, win the world's applause,
     And so thy venture sails with favouring winds,
     Blest with approval from all prurient minds.

     "See where at HORSHAM, Shelley's muse is crown'd!
     Two Parsons and a Justice on the ground!
     What glorious homage doth 'Prometheus' win!--
     Yet sure if ever parted ghosts can grin,
     Wild laughter from the Styxian shores must wake
     At such tame honours for the dead bard's sake;
     An EDMUND GOSSE doth make the day's oration,
     Oh, what a petty mouthpiece for a Nation!
     And WILLIAM SHARP, face-buried in his beard,
     Thinks his own works should be as much rever'd
     As Shelley's, if the world were only wise
     And viewed him with his own admiring eyes;
     And LITTLE (Stanley) doth with GOSSE combine
     To judge the perish'd Poet line by line,
     Granting his 'lyrics' admirably done,
     (Though they could match him easily, each one,)
     But, on the whole, he filled his 'mission' well;
     'Agreed!' says CHAIRMAN HURST, J.P., D.L.!

     "O Shelley! my companion and my friend,
     Brother in golden song, is this the end?
     Is this the guerdon for thy glorious thought,
     Thy dreams of human freedom, lightning-fraught?
     No larger honours from the world's chief city,
     Save this half-hearted, slow and dull 'Committee'?
     Where Names appear upon the muster-roll
     But only Names that lack all visible soul;
     Conspicuous by his absence, TENNYSON,
     The HORSHAM 'In Memoriam' doth shun;
     Next, HENRY IRVING'S name doth much attract
     (That 'glory' of the stage who cannot act)
     But even he, the Mime, keeps clear away
     From personal share in such a 'got-up' day,--
     And not one 'notable' the eye perceives,
     Save the Methusaleh of song, SIMS REEVES;
     Alas, dear Shelley! Hast thou fallen so low?
     And must thy Genius such dishonour know?
     Is this the way thy Centenary's kept?
     Better go unremembered and unwept
     Than be thus 'celebrated' in a hurry,
     And get 'recited' by an ALMA MURRAY!

     "Now hold, my Muse, and strive no more to tell
     The public what they all should know full well;
     Zeal for true worth has bid me here engage
     The host of idiots that infest the age
     And spin their meagre prose and verse for hire,
     Libelling genius if it dare aspire.
     Let harmless BARRIE scrawl a Scottish tale
     And English ears with 'dialect' assail,
     Let WILLIAM ARCHER judge, and bearded SHARP
     Condemn his betters, enviously carp
     At living bards (if any), one and all,
     Such is the way of versifiers small;
     Let MORRIS whine and steal from Tennyson,
     The poet King, whose race is nearly run,
     Let ARNOLD drivel on, and SWINBURNE rave,
     And godly PATMORE chant a stupid stave,
     Let KIPLING, CAINE, and HARDY, and the rest,
     And all the women-writers unrepressed,
     Scrawl on till death release us from the strain,
     Or Art assume her highest rights again;
     Let HENLEY, to assert his tawdry muse,
     Damn other bards by scurrilous reviews,
     Feeding with rancour his congenial mind,
     Himself the most cantankerous of his kind;
     Let ANDREW LANG undaunted, take his stand
     Beside his favourite bookstalls, secondhand;
     Let 'Pseudonyms' appear in yellow pairs,
     Let careful STANNARD sell her 'Winter' wares,
     Let WATTS 'puff' SWINBURNE, SWINBURNE bow to WATTS,
     And Shakespeare be disproved by MRS. POTTS;
     Let all the brawling folly of the time
     Find vent in vapid prose and vulgar rhyme;
     Let scribblers rush into the common mart
     With all their mutilated blocks of art,
     And take their share of this ephemeral day
     With COLLINS and her 'Ta-ra-Boom-de-ay';
     And what their end shall be, let others tell;
     My time is up and I must say farewell,
     Content at least that I have once agen
     Poured scorn upon the puny writing men
     That chaffer for the laurel wreath of fame,
     And think their trash deserves a lasting name.
     Immortal, I behold the passing show
     Of little witlings ruling things below,
     And smile to see, repeated o'er and o'er,
     The literary tricks I lash'd before,
     And lash again, with satisfaction deep;
     And other 'rods in pickle' I shall keep
     For those who on my memory slanders fling,
     Envying the songs they have no power to sing!

     "Gods of Olympus! Comrades of my thought,
     Where is the fire that once Prometheus brought
     To light the world? It warmed _my_ ardent veins,
     And still the nations echo forth my strains;
     Greece still doth hold me as her minstrel dear
     And decks with fragrant myrtle boughs my bier--
     ENGLAND forgets--but England is no more
     The England that our fathers loved of yore--
     A huckster's stall--a swarming noisy den
     Of bargaining, brutal, ignorant, moneyed men--
     England, historic England! She is dead,
     And o'er her dust the conquering traders tread,
     Crowning with shameful glory on her grave,
     Some greasy Jew or speculating knave;
     While blundering GLADSTONE, double-tongued and sly,
     Rules; the dread 'Struldbrug,'[2] who will never die!

     "Thus far I've held my undisturbed career
     Prepared for rancour--spirits know not fear!
     Catch me, a Ghost, who can! Who knows the way?
     Cheer on the pack! The quarry stands at bay;
     Unmoved by all the 'Savile' logs that roll--
     I stand supreme, a deathless poet-soul--
     Careless of LANG'S resentment, GOSSE'S spite,
     SWINBURNE'S small envy, ARNOLD'S judgment trite,
     HENLEY'S weak scratch, or _Pall Mall_ petty rage,
     Or the dull _Saturday's_ unlessoned page--
     Such 'men in buckram' shall have blows enough,
     And feel they too are 'penetrable stuff,'
     And by stern Compensation's law shall be
     Racked on the judgment-wheel they meant for me!

     "Adieu! Adieu! I see the spectral sail
     That wafts me upwards, trembling in the gale,
     And many a starry coast and glistening height
     And fairy paradise will greet my sight,
     And I shall stray through many a golden clime
     Where angels wander, crowned with light sublime;
     When I am gone away into that land
     Publish at once this ghostly reprimand,
     And tell the puling scribblers of the town
     I yet can hunt 'boomed' reputations down!
     Yet spurn the rod a critic bids me kiss,
     Nor care if clubs or cliques applaud or hiss,
     And though I vanish into finer air
     The spirit of my Muse is everywhere;
     Let all the 'boomed' and 'booming' dunces know
     BYRON still lives--their dauntless, stubborn Foe!"


Enunciating the last two lines with tremendous emphasis, the noble
Ghost folded up his scroll. I noticed that in the course of his reading
he frequently repeated his former self, and borrowed largely from an
already published world-famous Satire; and I ventured to say as much
in a mild _sotto voce_.

"What does that matter?" he demanded angrily. "Do not the names of the
New school of literary goslings fit into my lines as well as the Old?"

I made haste to admit that they did, with really startling accuracy of
rhythm.

"Well, then, don't criticise," he continued; "any ass can do that!
Write down what I have read and publish it--or----"

What fearful alternative he had in store for me I never knew, for just
then he began to dissolve. Slowly, like a melting mist, he grew more
and more transparent, till he completely disappeared into nothingness,
though for some minutes I fancied I still saw the reflection of his
glittering laurel wreath playing in a lambent circle on the floor.
Awed and much troubled in mind, I went to bed and tried to forget my
spectral visitor. In vain! I could not sleep. The lines recited by the
disembodied Poet burned themselves into my memory as he had said they
would, and I had to get up again and write them down. Then, and not
till then, did I feel relieved; and though I thought I heard a muttered
"Swear!" from some a "fellow in the cellarage," I knew I had done my
duty too thoroughly to yield to coward fear. And I can only say that
if any of the highly distinguished celebrities mentioned by the ghost
in his wrathful outburst feel sore concerning his expressed opinion of
them, they had better at once look up a good "medium," call forth the
noble lord, and have it out with him themselves. I am not to blame. I
cannot possibly hold myself responsible for "spiritual" manifestations.
No one can. When "spooks" clutch your hand and make you write things,
what are you to do? You must yield. It is no good fighting the air. Ask
people who are qualified to know about "influences" and "astral bodies"
and other uncanny bits of supernatural business, and they will tell
you that when the spirits seize you you must resign yourself. Even so
I have resigned myself. Only I do not consider I am answerable for a
ghost's estimate of the various literary lustres of the age:--


    "Byron's opinions these, in every line;
    For God's sake, reader, take them not for mine!"


FOOTNOTE:

[2] The "Struldbrugs" were a race of beings who inhabited the "Island
of Laputa," and were born with a spot on the forehead, a sign which
indicated their total exemption from death. (See Dean Swift's
"Gulliver's Travels.")




XX.

MAKETH EXIT.


The hour grows late, dear friends, and I am getting bored. So are you,
no doubt. But though, as I said in the beginning, I take delight in
boring you because I think the majority of you deserve it, I have an
objection to boring myself. Besides, I notice that some of you have
begun to hate me; I can see a few biliously-rolling eyes, angry frowns,
and threatening hands directed towards my masked figure, as I leisurely
begin to make my way out of your noisy, tumultuous, malodorous social
throng. Spare yourselves, good people! Keep cool! I am going. I have
had enough of you, just as you have had enough of me. I told you,
when I first started these "remarks aside," that I did not wish to
offend any of you; but it is quite probable that, considering the
overweening opinion you have of your own virtues and excellencies, you
are somewhat thin-skinned, and apt to take merely general observations
as personal ones. Do not err in this respect, I beseech you! If any
fool finds a fool's cap that fits him, I do not ask him to put it on.
I assure you that for Persons I have neither liking nor disliking,
and one of you is no more and no less than t'other. Loathe me an' you
choose, I shall care little; love me, I shall care less. Both your
loathing and your love are sentiments that can only be awakened by
questions of self-interest; and you will gain nothing and lose nothing
by me, as I am the very last person in the world to be "of use" to
anybody. I do not intend to be of use. A useful person is one who is
willing to lie down in the mud for others to walk dryshod over him, or
who will amiably carry a great hulking sluggard across a difficulty
pick-a-back. Now, I object to being "walked over," and if any one
wanted to try "pick-a-back" with me, he would find himself flung in
the nearest gutter. Wherefore, you observe, I am not "Christianly"
disposed, and should not be an advantageous acquaintance. Though, if
I were to tell you all the full extent of my income, I dare say you
would offer me many delicate testimonies of affectionate esteem. Sweet
women's eyes might smile upon me, and manly hands might grip mine in
that warm grasp of true friendship which is the result of a fat balance
at the banker's. But, all the same, these attentions would not affect
me. I am not one to be relied upon for "dinner invitations" or "good
introductions," and I never "lend out" my horses. I keep my opera-box
to myself too, with an absolutely heartless disregard of other people's
desires. I learned the gospel of "looking after Number One" when I
was poor; rich folks taught it me. They never did anything for me or
for anybody else without a leading personal motive, and I now follow
their wise example. I live my life as I choose, thinking the thoughts
that come naturally to me, my mind not being the humble reflex of any
one morning or evening newspaper; so I am not surprised that some of
you, whose opinions are the mere mirror of journalism, hang back and
look askance at me, the while I pass by and take amused observation of
your cautious attitudes through the eye-holes of my domino. Certes,
by all the codes of social "sets" you ought to respect me. I am the
member of a House, the adherent of a Party, and the promoter of a
Cause, and your biggest men, both in politics and literature, know me
well enough. I might even claim to have a "mission," if I were only
properly "boomed"--that is, of course, if the Grand Old _Struldbrug_,
as the irreverent ghost of Lord Byron calls him, Gladdy, were to rub
his noddle against that of Knowles, and emit intellectual sparks about
me in the _Nineteenth Century_. But I don't suppose I could ever live
"up" to such a dazzling height of fame as this. It would be a wild
jump to the topmost peak of Parnassus, such as few mortals would have
strength to endure. So on the whole I think I am better and safer where
I am, as an "unboomed" nobody. And where am I? Dear literary brothers
and sisters, dear "society" friends, I am just now in your very midst;
but I am retiring from among you because--well, because I do not feel
at home in a human menagerie. The noise is as great, the ferocity is as
general, the greed is as unsatisfied, and the odour is as bad as in any
den of the lower animals. I want air and freedom. I would like to see
a few real men and women just by way of a change--men who are manly,
women who are womanly. Such ideal beings may be found in Mars perhaps.
Some scientists assure us there are great discoveries pending there.
Let us hope so. We really require a new planet, for we have almost
exhausted this.

And now adieu! Who is this that clutches me and says, will I unmask?
What, Labby? Now, Labby, you know very well I would do anything to
please you; but on this occasion I must, for the first time in my
life, refuse a request of yours. Presently, my dear fellow, presently!
The domino I wear shall be flung off in your pleasant study in Old
Palace Yard on the earliest possible occasion. Believe it! It would
be worse than useless to try to hide myself from your eagle ken. The
"lady with the lamp" on the cover of _Truth_ shall flash her glittering
searchlight into my eyes, and discover there a friendly smile enough.
Meanwhile, permit me to pass. That's kind of you! A thousand thanks!
And now, with a few steps more, I leave the crowd behind me, and,
loitering on its outskirts, look back and pause. I note its wild
confusion with a smile; I hear its frantic uproar with a sigh. And with
the smile still on my lips, and the sigh still in my heart, I slowly
glide away from the social and literary treadmill where the prisoners
curse each other and groan--away and back to whence I came, out into
the wide open spaces of unfettered thought, the "glorious liberty
of the free." I wave my hand to you, dear friends and enemies, in
valediction. I have often laughed at you, but upon my soul, when I
come to think of the lives you lead, full of small effronteries and
shams, I cannot choose but pity you all the same. I would not change
my estate with yours for millions of money. Many of you have secured
what in these trifling days is called fame; many others rejoice in
what are pleasantly termed "world-wide" reputations; but I doubt if
there is any one among you who is as thoroughly happy, as careless, as
independent, and as indifferent to opinion, fate, and fortune, as the
idle masquerader who has strolled casually through your midst, seeking
no favours at your hands, and making no apologies for existence, and
who now leaves you without regret, bidding you a civil "Farewell!"

Remaining in unabashed candour and good faith, one who is neither your
friend nor enemy,

THE SILVER DOMINO.


The Gresham Press,

UNWIN BROTHERS,

CHILWORTH AND LONDON.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SILVER DOMINO***


******* This file should be named 63446-0.txt or 63446-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/4/4/63446


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

